**The Dark Enlightenment of John Gray**

It's very much easier to know what John Gray is against than what he is
for. This is partly because he's against so much and partly because,
when he's against something, he tends to be *very* against it. But he is
often frustratingly obscure about what he is for, which often changes. A
path out of the very grave dangers that Gray believes we now face never
quite comes into focus in his writings, probably because he thinks that
the modern West's sickness is incurable.

Among the things that Gray has most strongly and consistently been
against is the Enlightenment. He argues that, from the
eighteenth-century seed of the Enlightenment have grown a wide range of
moral and political pathologies, including totalitarianism, fascism,
Communism, environmental degradation, nihilism, Jacobinism, liberal
imperialism, Bolshevism, a highly destructive form of capitalist
fundamentalism, radical Islam, and even the Counter-Enlightenment. He
links the Enlightenment directly to modernity, Christianity, and
pre-Socratic antiquity and bundles the whole package together in a giant
collection of monstrosities that have led the world to its present state
of ruination, with no apparent prospect of escape.

While my primary purpose in what follows is to explicate Gray's dark
portrait of the Enlightenment, its purportedly destructive role in
Western history, and what he thinks can be done about it, I will also
offer some critical reflections on a number of contentious claims,
assumptions, and conclusions he makes that raise doubts about the
plausibility and coherence of his views on the subject. My account is
based primarily on six of his many books covering a twenty-eight year
period, in which his presentation of the Enlightenment has remained very
consistent: *Isaiah Berlin* (1995), *Enlightenment's Wake* (1997),
*Voltaire* (1999), *Black Mass* (2007) and *Seven Types of Atheism*
(2018), and *The New Leviathans* (2023).

**Gray's Portrait of the Enlightenment**

Despite its opposition to organized religion, the Enlightenment for Gray
was an intolerant and fundamentalist religious creed based on a set of
dogmatic and mistaken beliefs that have caused unprecedented social and
political damage that is still being felt today. He contrasts the
movement's benevolent self-image with its reality and consequences, as
he sees them, in the starkest possible terms.

While Gray cursorily acknowledges that the Enlightenment was not a
monolithic movement, he nonetheless believes that it was united by a
common core of beliefs that constitute a 'single project,' which he
describes as the conviction that 'the basic values of civilized human
beings are essentially identical' (Gray 1999, p. 17). These universal
values form a 'new morality' based on reason and they define 'the
universal civilization for which all Enlightenment thinkers work' (Gray
1999, p. 17). Gray concludes that 'the ideal of such a universal
civilization remains the Enlightenment project to this day' (Gray 1999,
p. 19).

Directly connected to this Enlightenment faith in a single moral truth
is its dogmatic belief in a philosophy of history according to which
there will and should be a 'universal convergence on a cosmopolitan and
rationalist civilization' based on that truth (Gray 1997, p. 121).
According to the philosophical anthropology of the Enlightenment that
Gray sketches, societies occupy positions on a developmental continuum,
with technologically advanced, science-based, secular nations like
Britain and France, which regard themselves as the most 'civilized,' at
one end, and primitive, religiously saturated nations and peoples, who
are supposedly 'barbaric' by the standards of enlightened modernity, at
the other end. Gray sees all this as deeply sinister since it is the
justification for the Enlightenment's zealous mission to move all
societies along the spectrum to civilization, by force if necessary, an
attitude inherited by many of the later political ideologies that he
claims grew out of it, above all liberalism. He refers to 'the
Enlightenment project of re-founding morality and social life on
universal and rationally compelling principles' (Gray 1997, p. 158), a
project that he considers both doomed to failure and highly destructive
of the human and natural worlds.

Like Friedrich Nietzsche, on whom Gray relies very heavily in his
diagnosis of the sickness at the heart of Western civilization, he
believes in what might be called the 'continuity thesis' of Western
history---that it constitutes a single, continuous stream of rationalist
humanism aiming at its ultimate realization in a universal civilization
with a common morality discoverable by reason. This is the thematic core
of the West whose 'march to a better world' is but a series of
variations on it, of which the Enlightenment is one. Gray links the
Enlightenment to the 'logocentrism' of pre-Socratic antiquity and the
philosophical rationalism of Plato. With Nietzsche, he sees Christianity
as continuous with this outlook that subordinates all particular forms
of life and customary local practices and beliefs to a single, universal
standard of truth.

The Enlightenment is not the final chapter in this monistic intellectual
tradition of Western culture, since it gave birth to liberalism, the
dominant form of that culture in our time. In fact, Gray believes that
all modern political ideologies that emerged in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries are offspring of the Enlightenment, despite the
intense antipathies between them. For example, during the Cold War,
Western liberalism was 'a relic of Enlightenment rationalism' (Gray
1997, p. 156) no less than Soviet Communism, which was 'one of the
Enlightenment's stupendous constructions' (Gray 1997, p. 33). And Gray
even claims that the Nazis 'were also in some ways children of the
Enlightenment' (Gray 2007, p. 52), just as racism 'is a product of the
Enlightenment' (Gray 2007, p. 86). There is very little that is bad
about our world that is *not* linked to the Enlightenment for him.

What distinguishes the Enlightenment variation on this Western
rationalist theme is its identification of knowledge with the practice
of science. 'It is this step,' Gray writes, which marks the difference
of modern from ancient or medieval rationalism' (Gray 1997, p. 161). It
was in eighteenth century Europe that science came to be seen as the one
true path to knowledge of reality, including morality. From this faith
arose the technology society that we now inhabit, which is for Gray an
iron cage rather than the liberation it was meant to be.

Gray rejects every aspect of the Enlightenment outlook, as he sees it,
for being dangerously wrong. Its utopian and na√Øve assumptions about
human nature, value, and historical progress have caused death and
destruction without precedent in the history of our species. Although
the dominant epistemology of the Enlightenment was empiricism and its
proponents viewed science as the sure path to knowledge, Gray claims
that its core assumptions were ultimately based on blind faith. That's
one reason he always calls the Enlightenment a 'creed' or a 'religion'
no different from any other religion in its basic dogmatism, except that
its mistaken beliefs are more dangerous than those of most religions.

**Enlightenment's Wake**

The Enlightenment was 'self-destroying,' 'self-undermining' and
therefore 'bound to fail' (Gray 1997, pp. 144, viii, 163), according to
Gray, because its grounding beliefs are wrong. Humans are not
fundamentally rational beings, history is not progressive, and there is
no single form of civilization that is based on universal moral
principles towards which all societies can and should converge. Any
belief system that proceeds from these Enlightenment assumptions will
eventually run aground on the rocks of reality, causing great havoc in
the process. That is why the Enlightenment's wake is littered with the
victims of well-intentioned attempts to 'unbend the crooked timber of
humanity' to compel it to fit the abstract formulas and idealistic
theories of elites who have dominated the mainstream of Western
intellectual life since at least the age of Pericles.

Gray claims that our age is 'distinguished by the collapse of the
Enlightenment project' (Gray 1997, p. 1). The West has lost faith in its
cherished rationalist beliefs, which has also led to a crisis of
liberalism, the civil religion of the West today, since 'liberal
cultures depend on the Enlightenment project' (Gray 1997, p. 168). We
are now in a transition period to a new post-Enlightenment, post-liberal
era, which Gray describes as 'a form of revolutionary nihilism' (Gray
1997, p. 178). The final collapse of faith in the Enlightenment project
in our time has left the West bereft of any substantive beliefs or
values, just as Nietzsche had argued that the 'death of God' was
succeeded by a nihilistic void of meaninglessness. For both, moral
collapse follows from the failure of the belief system that supported
it.

The form that this nihilism takes for Gray is thoroughly catastrophic.
Culturally, it has meant the merciless destruction of diverse forms of
life and traditional practices that gave variety and meaning to the
human world. These have been eradicated in the name of justice in order
to realize the universal civilization which is 'the *telos* of the
species' (Gray 1997, p. 121). Politically, it has justified countless
failed attempts since the French Revolution to force humans into various
procrustean designs that are contrary to our nature, usually at great
cost in human life. Environmentally, it has devastated the natural world
in the name of technological progress to the very limits of the planet's
resources. Gray writes that 'the legacy of the Enlightenment
project---which is also the legacy of Westernization---is a world ruled
by calculation and wilfulness which is humanly unintelligible and
destructively purposeless' (Gray 1997, p. 146).

All this is really warmed-up Friedrich Nietzsche, who also saw nihilism,
when all values lose their meaning, as the necessary culmination of
Western rationalism that began in antiquity. Hence Gray's assertion that
it is in Nietzsche 'that the definitive critique of the Enlightenment
project is to be found' (Gray 1997, p. 164). But, whereas the German
prophet of the √úbermensch¬†welcomed the advent of a world 'beyond good
and evil' as a liberation for those who matter (in his view), Gray sees
very little grounds for hope in the future. Uniquely insightful though
Nietzsche's diagnosis of our civilizational malaise is, his prescription
for it would only compound the problem. His cure would be worse than the
illness.[^1]

**No Way Back**

Any attempt to return to the past by reviving pre-modern modes of
thought and the practices they sustained is doomed to failure, according
to Gray. There can be 'no rolling back the central project of modernity'
(Gray 1997, p. 152). He emphatically denies that his negative account of
the Enlightenment has any reactionary political implications. For
example, he is critical of the Catholic critic of modernity Alasdair
MacIntyre for offering Aristotelian ethical naturalism as a possible
alternative to the moral impasse that both believe the West now finds
itself in. Since Gray agrees with Nietzsche that the very roots of
Western universalism reach back to antiquity, returning to pre-modern
modes of thought, assuming that was even possible, would be no escape
from the basic problem that has led to modern nihilism. Ancient and
medieval societies in the West were also 'projects of cultural
fundamentalism' no less than the Enlightenment and liberalism are (Gray
1997, p. 126). For Gray, everything about the West is tainted by a
fundamental hostility to what he calls the 'truth of value pluralism,'
which is the correct belief that there is no single, rationally
compelling arrangement of values applicable to all humans everywhere.
That is why he rejects the 'Right project of cultural fundamentalism' as
much as universalist projects of the political left (Gray 1997, p. 126).
Since the entire history of the West, including the Enlightenment, is
based on monist foundations, going backwards would be pointless. Gray is
more thoroughly anti-Western than the most radical Jihadists, whom he
claims are also expressions of Western universalist beliefs, as are the
neoconservatives who have waged wars against them in a supposed 'clash
of civilizations.'

One of Gray's intellectual heroes is Isaiah Berlin, whose case for value
pluralism is among his most important contributions to moral and
political philosophy. On this skeptical view, reason is powerless to
lead us to a single value that trumps all other values. Instead, there
is a diversity of objective values (such as justice, mercy, freedom,
equality) none of which can be ranked as rationally prior to the others.
Gray, who strongly endorses this view, argues that value pluralism
'affirms the ultimate validity of a diversity of polities, moralities,
forms of government and economy and of familial and social life---of a
diversity of cultural forms' (Gray 1997, p. 126). By contrast, value
monism asserts the validity of one universal ranking of values and value
relativism claims that there are no objective moral values at all. That
is why monism in all its forms is prone to tyranny and intolerance
whereas relativism leads to nihilism and anarchy. For Berlin and Gray,
pluralism is the correct view of the nature of value and is therefore
the only enduring and humane basis on which political and cultural life
can be built.

Berlin was also a liberal, unlike Gray. While Berlin affirmed the truth
that values are plural and can therefore legitimately be arranged in
different ways (including non-liberal ways), he believed that a liberal
framework of mutual restraint, tolerance, and freedom is the most likely
in practice to lead to general peace and prosperity, even if the liberal
preference for freedom over other values is no more rational than any
other arrangement of values.

Gray accepts the legitimacy of what can be called 'local liberalism'
(not a term he uses), arguing that value pluralism is 'wholly consistent
with practical support for liberal institutions in particular historical
circumstances' even though it has no logical basis (Gray 1997, p. 126).
It just so happens that liberal practices and beliefs have developed at
specific times and places that make them appropriate in those
circumstances, although they cannot reasonably be generalized and
applied universally, as monist liberals do.[^2]

Gray parts company with Berlin on liberalism, which he views as an
intolerant and hegemonic ideology hostile to all other forms of life.
Conceptually, Gray is an anti-liberal pluralist or 'agonistic
pluralist,' as he often calls it. He rejects any one-size-fits-all
prescriptions for human societies as both contrary to the truth of value
pluralism and as highly destructive in practice as a consequence. He
welcomes the collapse of the Enlightenment Project of instituting a
universal civilization based on liberal beliefs about morality, truth
and the human good as a historic moment when there may be 'a renaissance
of particularisms, ethnic and religious' (Gray 1997, p. 145). He wants
to open a path to deep diversity so that we can 'share the earth with
radically different cultures' (Gray 1997, p. 180). Gray advises that,
where traditional cultural forms survive, we should not just tolerate
them but 'seek to nurture them, to shelter them from modern technologies
which would rend them, and to develop new technologies which serve human
needs while preserving traditional communities and cultural forms' (Gray
1997, p. 146). By contrast, liberal practices 'do not best facilitate
the satisfaction of human needs' and do not respect the integrity of
non-liberal cultures, in which most people still live today (Gray 1997,
p. 156).

For Gray, the best that can be hoped for in a world based on the truth
of value pluralism in which many values and human goods are neither
practically nor conceptually reconcilable, is a purely pragmatic modus
vivendi. This means an acceptance that a 'live and let live' policy is
simply the best practical way to co-exist in peace and harmony in a
pluralistic world, if that is what people desire. The abstract claims of
universalist ideologies should be consigned to the dustbin of history as
a major source of violence, terror and misery.

**Gray's New Age After the Enlightenment**

Just as Gray relies substantially on Nietzsche for his diagnosis of the
crisis of Western civilization, he leans very much on the anti-humanism
of the controversial German philosopher (and Nazi) Martin Heidegger,
particularly his later writings, for his prescription for the illness
that he claims is killing us. In works such as his 'Letter on Humanism'
(1946) and 'The Question Concerning Technology' (1954), Heidegger
questions the Western humanist tradition that puts our species at the
center of value and frames our relationship to the natural world in
purely instrumental, objectified terms subject to human will.

Gray is very sympathetic to this Heideggerian critique of Western
humanism, which he agrees can be found close to the origins of ancient
Greek philosophy and runs through the whole history of Western
civilization. The culmination of this outlook is the modern, liberal,
technological civilization that is now collapsing around us, according
to Gray, leading to nihilism.

If something is falling, Nietzsche once proclaimed, then give it a push.
Gray thinks this is good advice for the contemporary West. First, he
says, we should 'relinquish the liberalisms and the humanisms by which
the Enlightenment cultures were, and continue to be, animated' (Gray
1997, p. 152). The humanist conception of our species that is shared by
ancient Greek philosophy, Christian revelation, the Enlightenment, and
contemporary liberalism, according to which we can only be emancipated
through the growth of scientific knowledge, 'must be given up' (Gray
1997, p. 155). Gray also asserts that Western conceptions of morality
and science 'that are central elements in Enlightenment cultures' must
also be 'given up' (Gray 1997, p. 155). And the 'pretensions of science
to contain a rationally privileged world-view should be, and can be
humbled' (Gray 1997, p. 155).

In place of the discarded humanism of the West, Gray proposes that we
follow Heidegger's advice and adopt a 'mode of releasement' (Gray 1997,
p. 182) towards the world and towards other people, a posture of
passively 'letting things be' (Gray 1997, p. 182) that is 'free of
humanism' (Gray 1997, p. 183). This is the antithesis of the aggressive
and invasive mode of the Enlightenment and liberalism that has led us to
disaster. Inspiration for this new outlook, he tells us, can be found in
poetry and mysticism, particularly from 'non-Occidental peoples' (Gray
1997, p. 184).

Beyond a vague New Age reorientation towards the East and the invocation
of the obscure Heideggerian notion of 'releasement,' Gray says nothing
significant about where we should go from here. His prescriptions are so
airy and insubstantial as to imply that resistance is futile. He is
clear that the disenchantments the Enlightenment has brought to the
Western outlook are irreversible; they 'can perhaps be tempered, but not
overcome' (Gray 1997, p. 154). It seems that we should not rage against
the dying of the light but rather go gentle into that good night.

**From Black to Gray**

Gray's depiction of the Enlightenment is not a thing of subtlety or
complexity. He tends to paint in black-and-white rather than in shades
of grey on the subject. It isn't clear (to me) just how extensive his
knowledge of the Enlightenment really is. He quotes liberally from
Voltaire in his small book on the great French *philosophe*, but his
writings are not generally rooted in primary texts.[^3] Most are
deliberately broad and sketchy, aimed at an audience of general readers,
rather than fine portraits composed for academic specialists, which
helps to explain their wide appeal.

By contrast, in the last half-century scholarship on the Enlightenment
has become increasingly specialized and complex. It is now viewed by
most experts as a very broad and diverse social, cultural, and
intellectual movement that extended far beyond an elite circle of
Parisian writers that typically includes Voltaire, Rousseau,
Montesquieu, d'Alembert, Diderot, Condorcet, and d'Holbach. Distinctions
are now made between a 'high Enlightenment' of such intellectuals and a
'low Enlightenment' of Grub Street journalists and pamphleteers who are
now mostly forgotten.[^4] And we know of the existence of Enlightenments
in many different national contexts, including Bohemia, Italy, Sweden,
Scotland, Russia, and the Netherlands, each with important variations in
outlook and emphasis that reflect local circumstances and cultural and
historical particularities.[^5] This increasingly complicated picture
has even led some scholars to reject the concept of a single
Enlightenment movement ('the Enlightenment,' with a definite article and
capital 'E'), let alone a unified Enlightenment 'project.'[^6]

One example of the Enlightenment's internal complexity will have to
suffice here in the absence of space for more, and it is necessarily
sketchy. The common perception of the eighteenth century as the 'Age of
Reason' when Enlightenment thinkers exalted reason above the passions is
shared by Gray. It is one of the typically na√Øve assumptions of its
proponents that he often criticizes. Like Michael Oakeshott, he sees all
forms of rationalism in politics as dangerous delusions that often lead
to coercion and terror, particularly the Enlightenment form.

In fact, the views of the philosophers of the Enlightenment on this
covered a broad range. At one extreme, thinkers such as David Hume,
Denis Diderot and Jean-Jacques Rousseau regarded the passions as greater
than reason and could not fairly be accused of having a na√Øve faith in
the latter. It is with some justification that the historian Peter Gay
referred to 'the Enlightenment's rehabilitation of the passions' (Gay
1969, p. 192). At the opposite extreme were those such as the
mathematician the Marquis de Condorcet whose great confidence in the
power of human reason was the basis of his faith in progress and
unshakeable optimism about the future, particularly as expressed in his
posthumously published *Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress
of the Human Mind*¬†(1795). Most stood somewhere between these two poles,
so it is hard to speak about a single Enlightenment view on this. Gray's
Enlightenment is a simplification that looks more like the
unrepresentative Condorcet than it does the typical, mainstream
eighteenth-century thinkers, most of whom viewed humans as a complex and
volatile mix of reason and passions.

The same is true of many other aspects of eighteenth-century thought,
such as religion and historical progress, which were just as varied.
Often it is the enemies of the Enlightenment who set it up with a
spurious internal coherence in order to make it an easier target to
knock down.[^7] To some extent, 'the Enlightenment' is a construction of
its enemies, and Gray is a good example of this. It is first constructed
before it is de-constructed.

It is not entirely clear what the outer limits of Gray's pluralism are
that would keep him from straying into relativism. Here, the stark
black-and-white of his portrait of the Enlightenment is replaced by a
grey, misty vagueness and boldness gives way to reticence. His
anti-liberal 'agonistic pluralism' is meant to encompasses a broad range
of illiberal and even anti-liberal societies. It would appear to
preclude all forms of monism, including liberal monism, although 'local
liberalism,' as I call it, is consistent with the 'truth of value
pluralism.' But just how expansive and tolerant is his agonistic
pluralism?

Pluralism differs from relativism in accepting the existence of
objective human goods and values. It differs from monism in accepting
that such goods and values are not all consistent with each other and
there is no way to arrange them that is more rational than other ways. A
liberal monist, for example, will affirm that freedom trumps all other
cards in the values deck, so they must be subordinated to it when they
clash, something pluralists deny. A relativist will not affirm anything
morally, also something pluralists reject.

We have already seen that Gray calls for the development of new
technologies that 'serve human needs' and he criticizes liberal
practices for not facilitating 'the satisfaction of human needs' (Gray
1997, p. 156). And, contrary to the views of some post-modernists, he
asserts that there are 'some values that reflect universal human needs'
and thinks a commitment to 'civilized restraint' on the use of force is
necessary. But he immediately qualifies this by claiming that not all
human needs are consistent with each other and there is no rational way
to arbitrate them. And the fact that such needs exist cannot, in itself,
tell us whether they have any moral status without committing the
naturalistic fallacy, something Gray appears to do here. Also, he tells
us that universal values can be 'embodied in different ways,' none of
which is more rational or legitimate than the rest (Gray 2007, p. 279).

So, while Gray is clearly a pluralist rather than a relativist, it
remains frustratingly obscure what the outer moral limits of his
pluralism are. He does not specify what universal human needs are and
does not really explore their implications for his position. His
language implies that they not only exist but should (in the normative
sense) be satisfied, something he says liberalism cannot do. If this
applies to all humans, then how can he avoid a version of ethical
naturalism of the kind that he otherwise rejects as universalist,
something that will eventually lead to nihilism via some form of
political pathology?

In addition to the satisfaction of human needs as a requirement of his
agonistic pluralism, setting it apart from relativism, Gray appears to
expect societies to accept 'the truth of value pluralism,' which he
regards as the only realistic foundation for political life. He welcomes
a 'renaissance of particularisms, ethnic and religious,' wants to 'share
the earth with radically different cultures,' and preserve 'traditional
communities and cultural forms,' all of which are antithetical to the
universal civilization that Gray argues is the final goal of the
Enlightenment Project. But does he really believe that most of these
traditional, non-liberal cultures would endorse value pluralism?

Gray accuses liberalism of a dangerously utopian idealism, but there is
a clear lack of realism here in his apparent expectation that
non-Western cultures might embrace value pluralism any more than Western
cultures have. He has already ruled out as unacceptable 'projects of
cultural fundamentalism' found in some reactionary anti-modernists. So
Gray presumably wants all cultures to reject such fundamentalism in
favour of value pluralism while still retaining their 'traditional
communities and cultural forms.' If this really is his hope, then it
seems like little more than a fantasy. But his very vague and seemingly
unserious comments on all this strongly hint that's just how he sees
it---as a fantasy. But if he is serious and if it did somehow come
about, then the world would be a plurality of pluralists and not a
plurality of monists. In that case it's hardly likely to contain
'radically different cultures.' Such a world would probably look quite
similar to the liberal hegemony he claims we have now, albeit with a
Rortian rather than a Rawlsian hue.

There is also a dearth of realism in Gray's requirement that the West
just 'give up' its most fundamental assumptions about itself and the
world that he claims have underpinned and legitimized its outlook for
millennia. It is not clear what it even means to do so. Nor is it
apparent if he intends the West to 'give up' all of science, or just
selected parts of it. If the latter, how would that be possible without
retaining the universalist assumptions and methods on which those parts
are based? If the former, then would Gray really want to throw out all
of the technological benefits we currently enjoy, such as those of
medical science? It would help if he was much more specific about what
he actually intends and explained more clearly just how far beyond
liberalism and Western science he thinks we should go in the wake of the
Enlightenment. That he has avoided doing so raises the possibility that
none of his rather under-developed prescriptions are really meant to be
taken too seriously.

**References**

Condorcet, Jean-Antoine-Nicolas de Caritat, Marquis de. 1955 \[1795\].
Condorcet. Sketch for a Historical Picture of the Progress of the Human
Mind. Trans. June Barraclough, with an introduction by Stuart Hampshire.
New York: Noonday.

Garrard, Graeme. 1997. The Counter-Enlightenment Liberalism of Isaiah
Berlin. *Journal of Political Ideologies*, 2(3): 281-96.

Garrard, Graeme. 2008. Nietzsche For and Against the Enlightenment.
*Review of Politics*, 70(4): 595-608.

Garrard, Graeme. 2006. *Counter-Enlightenments: From the Eighteenth
Century to the Present*. London: Routledge.

Gay, Peter. 1969. *The Enlightenment: An Interpretation*, vol. 2: *The
Science of Freedom*. London: Wildwood House.

Gray, John. 1995. *Isaiah Berlin*. London and New York: HarperCollins.

Gray, John. 1997 \[1995\]. *Enlightenment's Wake: Politics and Culture
at the Close of the Modern Age*. New York and London: Routledge.

Gray, John. 1999 \[1997\]. *Voltaire*. New York: Routledge.

Gray, John. 2007. *Black Mass: Apocalyptic Religion and the Death of
Utopia*. London: Penguin.

Gray, John. 2018. *Seven Types of Atheism*. London: Penguin.

Gray, John. 2023. *The New Leviathans*. London: Penguin.

Outram, Dorinda. 2019 \[1995\]. *The Enlightenment*, 4^th^ ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Porter, Roay and Mikul√°≈° Teich, eds. 1981. *The Enlightenment in
National Context*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Schmidt, James. 2000. What Enlightenment Project? *Political Theory*,
28(6): 734-57.

[^1]: Nietzsche was actually surprisingly ambivalent about the
    Enlightenment, as I have shown in Garrard 2008.

[^2]: See Garrard 2007 for an account of Berlin's views on liberalism
    and the Enlightenment.

[^3]: Gray 2023 is an exception. It relies directly on the writings of
    Thomas Hobbes.

[^4]: For a very good general overview of these changes in Enlightenment
    historiography, see Outram 2019.

[^5]: The various national forms of Enlightenment are chronicled in
    Porter and Teich 1981.

[^6]: See Schmidt 2000.

[^7]: This is the theme of Garrard 2006
