**The Futility of the Recognition Paradigm**

Attila K. Molnar

**Abstract:** The recognition paradigm has emerged to understand the
core of human conflicts in terms of Hegel's master-slave dialectic.
However, the Hegel's dialectic has been turned into an antipolitical
project: many writers of this paradigm have suggested that 1, mutual
recognition can be achieved, 2, and it may result the end of conflicts.
This paper shows that theoretically as well as empirically these are
vain hopes, because recognition is a positional good. And the movements
claiming recognition search for upper-hand position instead of
mutuality.

**Keywords:** recognition, human nature, ambition, conflict,
antipolitics

In political modernity several versions of egalitarianism are so
dominant that it is not unreasonable to assert that in contemporary
"political discourse, the claim that 'all humans are equal' is often
assumed to be obviously true". (Carter 2011, p. 540) The claim itself is
seen unproblematic. The 19^th^ century was dominated by legal and
political egalitarianism -- although not entirely, but rather under the
flag of nationalism -- while the 20^th^ century was obviously dominated
mainly by the economic brand of egalitarianism -- known either as
socialism or welfarism. However, by the mid-1970s, long before the
collapse of the state socialism in 1989-1991, it had already become
apparent that socialism cannot provide either a satisfying egalitarian
redistribution of material goods, nor the economic prosperity that could
produce an abundance of these goods. The reaction was the rise of
free-marketism, promoted by the likes of Thatcher and Reagan, which
promised economic prosperity at the expense of economic equality.
Egalitarians looked for a new avenue of expression, turning toward
non-material goods, such as psychological well-being and moral
authority, which seemed to be in inexhaustible abundance.

Egalitarians have found a type of goods -- respect or recognition (and
the resulting psychological satisfaction and emotional well-being and
self-confidence they bring) -- which are seemingly in abundant supply
and which are unaffected by the human conflicts arising from scarcity.
This kind of egalitarianism has brought forth multiculturalism and the
notion of deliberative democracy. This shift away from economic
egalitarianism has fitted well with the so-called cultural turn of the
Left, initiated by Lukacs' *History and Class Consciousness* and
furthered by the Frankfurtians, which focuses on criticism of bourgeois
thinking and culture instead of critiquing property relations.

Since the decline of economic egalitarianism, moral egalitarianism has
dominated the contemporary landscape of academia, and its influence has
spread without any serious obstacle. "Liberal modernity becomes
distinctively ethical". (Anderson 2009, p. 11) Moral egalitarianism is,
in logical terms, non-egalitarian in some respects, however. It involves
drawing moral distinctions and passing judgements on its opponents,
labelling them racist, sexist, and the like, to morally devalue them.
Moral egalitarianism cannot accept any other moral position than its
own. It cannot accept or tolerate moral disagreement, and that is why
many see this way of thinking as totalitarian in nature or at least
oppressive. Recently, the wide scale protests against moral
egalitarianism and resistance to its more extreme forms, which
depreciate the morality of common people, has been labelled populism.

*Recognition*

The latest dominant version of egalitarianism is closely connected to
the notions of respect and recognition, and their horizon of meaning.
One thread in modern political thinking has concerned how to eliminate
politics. In the past, the positivist and Marxist versions of scientism,
and later the moralised politics of Kantian liberalism were seen as an
escape route from politics, but recently the dominant utopian idea has
been labelled deliberative democracy and regarded as intersubjective
communication. Beside the hopes to escape from politics, the literature
of modern politics has focused on the construction of an ordered life of
free and equal people. The first approach to addressing the problems of
plurality was to set borderlines (public/private; Protestant/Catholic;
etc.) to delimit fields of tolerance (Milton, Bayle, Locke, Mill). The
second such strategy adopted was the short-lived idea of neutrality
(John Rawls) while the most recent form is the respect/recognition
paradigm connected to the ideas of multiculturalism and deliberative
democracy.

Today the criticism of recognition has become a taboo, and it is taken
for granted and cannot be criticized, just like equality and human
rights cannot be criticized. ^"^To be 'against recognition' seems, on
the face of it, to be an unsustainable position...To be against
recognition in this sense would be untenable since it would entail
opposition to the crucial insights into the dialogical and non-rational
nature of subjectivity that have informed many significant, frequently
radical, traditions of thought. The idea of recognition has also
acquired renewed significance, in the past decade or so, as a way of
denoting the increasingly central role played by identity claims in
social and political conflict". (McNay 2008, p. 1)

Recognition (or respect) means valuing somebody or something, regarding
them as worthy and appreciating them as they are. Recognition has an
evaluative sense: it carries connotations of evaluating something which
is not common, but which is outstanding or extraordinary. It "differs
from the others insofar as it is a comparative appraisal of a person's
merits or an evaluation of her relative quality in light of some
standards of excellence". (Dillon 1992, p. 111) It is important as a
moral attitude referring to others, not as a recognition of facts, laws
or physical environment. However, I would suppose, it is rather
characteristic for this paradigm that the efforts aimed at the
egalitarian reinterpretation of recognition use the terms "recognition"
and "respect" interchangeably, and cannot separate them from "esteem",
"honour", "prestige" and other synonyms.

Typical contemporary moral and political papers concerning recognition
suppose that people demand or deserve equal respect, that is, they
demand a form of recognition that "must not be due to some people more
than others". (Bird 2004, p. 209) Recognition as an egalitarian
normative claim refers to mutual and symmetrical interpersonal
relations. In general, mutuality has become one of the key ideas of the
contemporary form of egalitarianism. Mutual recognition is seen today as
the only just and democratic relationship between individuals and
groups, and "the value of mutual recognition... is at the core of
deliberative democracy". (Gutman and Thompson 1996, p. 7)

The idea of mutual dependence, as opposed to either hierarchy and
dependence or independence and autonomy is an old concept, connected to
the Scottish moral thinkers' notion of *sympathy*. It became dominant
mainly in the descriptive notion of the division of labour, which was
devoid of any hint of criticism, as represented for children in Richard
Scarry's *Busytown*. Accompanying the current dominance of free market
economic rhetoric, the previous ideal of mutual interpersonal (moral)
dependence has come into fashion again, but with a strongly prescriptive
tone. "Reciprocity is an explicitly moral principle". (Gutman and
Thompson 1996, p. 18.)

The normative force of the recognition paradigm comes from its
redemptive potential residing in the ideal of mutual recognition, but
this time the redemption -- both from inequalities and from the
concomitant discomforts and conflicts -- would not only be earthly, but
interpersonal and moral.

Contemporary egalitarianism is less economic in its focus, that is, it
is less concerned with redistribution of wealth, but is instead
preoccupied with moral and intersubjective themes. Thus, while
egalitarians throughout most of the 20th Century sought to change
institutions and the human mind in order to create economic equality,
today their successors' efforts are aimed at achieving intersubjective
moral equality experienced in and by means of mutual recognition. The
demand for recognition refers both to interpersonal relations and to
relations between individuals and institutions, so contemporary
egalitarians would change both. It is worth noting, however, that the
recent demands for recognition are much less focused on institutions
than they are on interpersonal relations.

After 1945, and particularly after the political takeover of the '68-ers
in most institutions, it became clear that neither enlightened
legislation nor the welfare state were capable of achieving the desired
equal and free society. After decades of leftist governments in various
countries, without clear oppressors like kings, aristocrats, etc., and
where everything was controlled by the benevolent representatives of the
people, a strong sense of frustration still remains. Therefore, the
contemporary utopia of justice has been focused on moral epistemology
and equality: how people can achieve consensus and justice, measured by
their subjective psychological satisfaction. Instead of the earlier goal
of legal or economic equality, today moral or intersubjective equality
(recognition) is the Holy Grail sought by intellectuals and implemented
by bureaucratic and legal enforcement. John Rawls clearly established
that self-esteem is the most important good and it depends on the esteem
of the Others'. "our self-respect normally depends upon the respect of
others". (Rawls 1971, p. 178) Therefore the satisfaction of one's Ego
depends on one's social environment, as Rousseau put it critically in
his *First Discourse*: Rawls hoped that self-esteem could be connected
to equality, and supposed that democrats would not wish to be the
masters of others in order to raise their self-esteem. A "desirable
feature of a conception of justice is that it should publicly express
men's respect for one another. In this way they insure a sense of their
own value". (Rawls 1971, p.179) Democratic self-esteem and pride is
somehow not equal with vanity and ambition.

This moral and political effort was closely connected to the discipline
of sociology which has provided a wealth of analysis showing that in
spite of legal and economic equality, a great deal of inequality
persists in everyday life within intersubjective relationships. The
present demands for recognition are related less to the work of
institutions, than they are to intersubjective attitudes.

Face-to-face inequality, due to a lack of recognition or due to any kind
of unfriendly attitudes, is evident in the communication of moral
requirements, the so-called pressure for conformity expressed by the
Others. These requirements are traditionally labelled as intolerant or
oppressive, but in this discourse they are instead deemed to be
misrecognition. They cause mental and moral suffering, a key criterion
of what constitutes unjust and violent behaviour. The demand for
recognition is justified basically by moral psychology, by the equal
right to self-respect and a positive self-image, an unmolested mind and
the concomitant psychological satisfaction. The refusal of this demand
is termed misrecognition, the root of injustice and conflict in the
world, and the unjust character of any human relation evidenced by the
psychological well-being of specified groups of people, labelled
"minorities". Thus, justice is realized in the recognition that is
claimed measured in terms of psychological well-being.

Refusing to grant the desired recognition, seen as an 'insult' or
'humiliation', is called injustice, because it damages one's positive
self-image. (Honneth 1995, p. 131) This misrecognition is observable in
a state of mind, as an infallible sign of unjust relations. "The
conflict -- coming from disapproval -- is based not on a violation of an
individual assertion of rights, but rather on a violation of the
integrity of the person as a whole... 'Honour', then, is the stance I
take towards myself when I identify positively with all my traits and
peculiarities". It would appear to follow that just or democratic honour
or dignity is antithetical to any normative criticism or self-criticism
or self-contempt, because these would hurt the Ego's integrity. "Our
ethical life rests upon a positive relation to ourselves". (Deranty and
Renault 2007, p. 101) Because everyone has a right to a positive
self-image that stems from recognition, and everyone has an equal right
to recognition, irrespective of any merit or qualification. Hence, after
the demolition of any idea of normality, there is only one politically
correct, that is, egalitarian moral requirement: the refusal of any
non-egalitarian requirements. Any other moral or functional requirements
may cause bad feelings, psychic discomfort or critical self-reflection,
and these are therefore forbidden as oppressive.

If an individual experiences an "insult", it is justified for him/her to
rebel and resist. The emphasis is on such justified rebellion.
Misrecognition may undermine self-righteousness and generate reflection,
but a democratic self has a right to be saved from self-reflection or
self-criticism. The aim is the elimination of the dialogical self -- the
consciousness or I/Me difference -- by eliminating any disapproval as
unjust. (Honneth 1996, p. 83)

In the rhetoric of recognition one can see a new argument for an old
utopia. The present rhetoric emphasizes psychological well-being and a
sense of self-righteousness, because it has become clear that material
well-being or a properly organized welfare state cannot grant the
happiness wished for by many. Beside legal and economic equality,
political hedonism demands intersubjective or moral equality, called
mutual recognition. The problem here is that legal or economic equality
and success would not satisfy ambitious people, because "in the theaters
gold cannot procure a seat for the servile race beside their former
masters". (Tocquevuille 1994, I. p. 359) It turned out after the
emancipation in the 19^th^ century that political and legal recognition
is not satisfying without social recognition, because the "judgement of
others is the last judgement; and social exclusion is the concrete form
of hell and damnation. It is also because man is a God unto man that man
is a wolf unto man". (Bourdieau 1990, p. 196) It turned out that social
misrecognition can generate the same resentment as political and legal
misrecognition. After achieving mass suffrage contemporary democrats
have sought equal recognition for the resentful people. The fundamental
insight of the followers of the recognition paradigm is that people may
be oppressed not only due to them lacking or being denied resources but
also or alternatively through a denial of recognition.

*Communicative utopia, communication as utopia*

The notion of mutual recognition is connected to the age-old hope for
consensus: if only all men could see the world from every others' point
of view, that is, if they are sympathetic toward one another, then
mutual understanding and an inclusive political community would emerge,
instead of the existing one, which is fraught with conflict between an
irreconcilable plurality of views, misrecognition and frustration. The
idealised dialogue of G.H. Mead is symmetrical, honest, serious, and
free from violence, enforcement or any kind of asymmetry. This equal and
free communicative situation involves continuous bargaining over
meanings, creating wall-to-wall consensus. From this point of view any
kind of inconvenience, limitation of freedom or sanction is fair only if
it is based on the consent of the affected persons.

The utopia of communication -- which will achieve truth and justice
sooner or later -- has been a constant in our culture since Milton's
*Aeropagitica,* but it was given a new twist by G.H. Mead's pragmatism.
(Benhabib 1985) According to Mead's account, intersubjective
communication is inherently symmetrical, even without power and
enforcement. Recently Habermas has continued this utopia through the
notion of the "ideal speech situation" and "communicative action".
Mead's pragmatic theory of interpersonal communication has become
important for contemporary egalitarians, because he connected the utopia
of (symmetrical) communication to the formation of the self.

Recent notions of democracy include the right to a peaceful soul and an
unmolested mind, undisturbed by the knowledge of failures. Mead's
idealized symmetrical communication would thus eliminate the mental
discomforts and self-assessment disorders which derive from
misrecognition. Therefore, instead of tolerance, positive reinforcement
-- in the guise of recognition, respect, etc. -- has emerged as the
highest virtue of egalitarianism, because "the flaunting of \[people's\]
vice in public hurts more than the vice itself". (Montaigne 1991, p.
296.) Tolerance in the past meant legal tolerance, but today it means,
above all, suspending moral or even functional requirements. The
recognition paradigm alludes to equal moral worth, but it opposes not
only moral requirements, because it translates all kinds of lack of
achievement into moral categories and turns the tensions arising from
these shortages into moral questions. The theoreticians of this paradigm
do not confront the question of how a society based on mutual
recognition, compassion, and a moral and "cultural" interest in avoiding
any misrecognition can at the same time run a contemporary complex and
performance-oriented economy.

Previous notions of tolerance or neutrality presupposed that differences
should not be relevant, while a paradigm which demands recognition means
that particularities are important, and a decent democrat should
positively support the demands for recognition of certain people. Not
"colour-blindness", but active moral support of minorities is the proper
egalitarian behaviour in face-to-face relations, in this model. Hence,
this mindset aims to prohibit the expression and vindication of moral
requirements in interpersonal relations. This is called the enforcement
of recognition. Equality may tolerate difference, but certainly not
recognise merit or superiority.

The language of recognition has reinterpreted oppression or exploitation
as including psychological trauma, pain, anxiety and self-assessment
disorders. These negative emotions are regarded as the signs of and a
convincing argument against pathological, unjust and unequal social
conditions. "Psychological oppression typically results from pressures
to conform to the standards and ways of life of majority cultures, who
assert their values and modes of expression as the 'norm,' or as
'universal,' and correspondingly designate the values and practices of
minority cultures as 'different,' merely particular, and inferior".
(Anderson 2009, p. 33) Justice and democracy can in this way be
perceived as subjective satisfaction or psychological well-being,
originating from being loved. (Honneth 1996, p. 135)

In the recognition paradigm, equality means everyone enjoying an equal
right to an unmolested mind, which includes self-confidence and a sense
of moral rightness and intersubjective reinforcement. Democracy and
justice are, above all, pleasant. This pleasant state of mind is termed
the integrated self, that is, one with a clear conscience, which is not
burdened by external expectations or sanctions from others. The demand
for recognition is a demand for the positive reinforcement of the
individual's self-confidence and positive self-image.

The argument for this claim is based on a socialized interpretation of
the self. In Hegelian and Meadian thinking the self emerges through
interaction and is created by the attitudes of Others, and this idea
underpins the main argument for transforming interpersonal relations and
enforcing recognition. In this constructivist interpretation, the self
is formed in and by its interactions with others, and power and
oppression exist also in these relations as misrecognition, a form of
oppression involving refusing to recognize someone else's demand.
Misrecognition -- meaning the refusal of recognition -- is oppressive
and hurts one's dignity. As a form of symbolic violence[^1] it provokes
the morally legitimate and rightful retaliatory violence of the
misrecognized. (Honneth 1996, p. 5)

The signs of misrecognition are a troubled mind, anxiety, perplexity and
self-doubt. Self-scrutiny, an ancient and Christian ideal, akin to a bad
conscience, has been reinterpreted as the consequence of the unjust and
unequal treatment of individuals. An integrated, harmonious self is the
result of its social environment, just like a frustrated and oppressed
self is. Happiness and satisfaction, and a peaceful mind can only exist
if there is respectful interaction. Therefore, democracy -- or as it is
interpreted in this paradigm, the equal right to psychological
well-being -- requires the proper types of interaction, involving love,
care, respect and encouragement. According to this argument, proactive
democratic states should make every effort to enforce these kinds of
relationships and prohibit every other kind. Social reconstruction is
necessary to satisfy everyone's need for self-respect and an unmolested
mind.

In the past, the integrated self or a peaceful, undisturbed soul was
seen as a result of grace, achieved by the Christians' pilgrimage in the
Valley of Sorrow. Today it is the birth right of every democrat, and
only oppressive and intolerant institutions and people are the source of
subjective moral calamities through their oppressive expectations and
through misrecognition. Thus, equality should be created in face-to-face
relationships by securing the wished for recognition for everyone or at
least for those considered underprivileged. In this psychologized
politics "man has a right to live in the world he wills himself".
(Henrie 1999, p. 371)

*The implicit idea of the non-constructed self or covert essentialism?*

Charles Taylor (Taylor 1994) has connected recognition to identity. In
his view, misrecognition is not problematic because its means
submission, but rather because it forces the Ego into a distorted
version of itself.

How can this be? If the self is constructed in and by interpersonal
relations, it consists of what can emerge in these circumstances. In
contrast, recognition is claimed to be the actualization of authentic
identity. In their argument for recognition and against misrecognition,
Taylor and Honneth supposed that there is a "real self" -- an "I" --
that should be recognized by Others and that is not the result of
intersubjective relations. It is not clear in their argument what the
origin of this "real self" is, that should be recognized by others, and
if this "real self" is not socially constructed, how misrecognition can
distort it. Those who argue for recognition in defence of the self do
not assert that the denial of recognition can hurt someone. Instead,
they emphasize that it demolishes or heavily distorts the self.

If the self is constructed in and by social interactions then,
theoretically, idealized mutual recognition would entail an open social
process resulting in random and unanticipated selves. However, in
practice the policy of recognition requires the support and
reinforcement of every participant's ready self-image and unmolested
mind. What is the source of self-image or authentic identity, if it is
not socially created in dialogue with others, but something that should
be respected? Does the self have direct access to something that is
independent from interaction and which should be recognised? The
normative requirement of recognition implies that the self is not
socially constructed in interaction and thus does not emerge from the
reactions of others, but has instead an independent core, having dignity
and the right to be respected. Without the presupposition of this "real"
(or authentic) self, the normative demand for recognition and the
condemnation of misrecognition would be meaningless. On the other hand,
without the theory of a self which is constructed in and by social
interactions, the significance of recognition could not be stressed.
Without this theory of self, misrecognition would simply be unpleasant
but not something deeply and fundamentally disastrous for the
misrecognized individual.

*Ambition and recognition*

The vocabulary of recognition refers partly to Mead's interpersonal
communicative utopia and partly to Hegel's recognition model of struggle
and the master-slave relationship. According to Kojeve, human beings
would even risk their own lives "in order to be 'recognized' by the
other, to impose itself on the other as the supreme value; accordingly,
their meeting can only be a fight to the death. And it is only in and by
such a fight that the human reality is begotten, formed, realized, and
revealed to itself and to others. Therefore, it is realized and revealed
only as 'recognized' reality." (Kojeve 1969, p. 7-8) The "human reality
is created, is constituted only in the fight for recognition and by the
risk of life that it implies". (Kojeve 1969, p. 12) The aim of the fight
is not to annihilate the Other, but to enforce his recognition, because
recognition is the most valued good possible, and one can only receive
recognition from the subdued. The subdued has to give up his claim for
recognition, but he is obliged to recognise the winner. In the Hegelian
perspective the relation between two consciousness is always
asymmetrical, because the claim for recognition is asymmetrical: the Ego
demands that the Other recognize him. The demand for recognition is a
demand for an asymmetrical relationship. The question is simply who will
be subdued and who will obtain recognition from the Other. The subdued
seeks to transform the world from a non-recognizing into a recognizing
one in which he can be the master. Therefore, in Hegel's account, the
claim for recognition cannot be said to foster agreement or mutuality.
It results in continuous fights and challenges, and obtaining
recognition means that the other will be subdued and unsatisfied. The
wish for recognition is a wish for a certain behaviour on the part of
the Other, whose wishes are thus not satisfied.

In Hegel's description it is not difficult to recognise the old theme of
ambition, running from Plato's Callicles and St. Augustine to Hobbes and
Rousseau's spoiled child. According to this tradition, man seeks
recognition at another's expense.

The demand for recognition was thus imbued with negative connotations in
western culture in the past. It was connected to the tyrannical man, as
often described by many realist political thinkers. Hobbes started from
St. Augustine's sinful man and from Plato's description of Callicles,
figures who can survive in a hostile world only if they take care of
themselves alone, striving to be the strongest and to arrange the social
world around themselves. The recognition they demand would be the
continuous affirmation of the Ego's sense of strength. In many
descriptions, man is tyrannical by nature. In Christian realism, as
Niebuhr called it, man searches for recognition or respect from the
Other, and because of the *libido dominandi* man seeks to keep or
reverse the master-slave relationship.

To the old question of whether order can exist without hierarchy in a
world of equals, Hobbes' answer is well known. As he wrote, life in the
world of equals is "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short". (Hobbes
1965 92.) The equals can be kept in a state of peaceful cooperation only
by force. However, *Leviathan* is not only about equality. It is also
about pride and ambition, the old subject of the *vanitas* topos.
Leviathan is the king of the children of pride (*ambitionis Elenchus*).
(Job 41:34) The ambitious men want the Others' appreciation that they
can only acquire from the losing competitors. Even then, only some of
them can occupy a position of appreciation, so the appreciated position
cannot be shared. That is why respect is a positional good, that is,
status can be taken in a zero-sum game. Prestige, status and respect can
be enhanced only at the expanse of others.

In this regard, it is worth referring here to the founding father of the
modern democratic thinking, Rousseau. *In addition to the widespread
interpretation of Rousseau's thought that human is good by nature and
prefers justice and order, he offers another perspective on human nature
in Emil, according to which Man aims to dominate his environment and
dominate his partners by nature:*

> "Man naturally considers all that he can get as his own. In this sense
> Hobbes' theory is true to a certain extent: Multiply both our wishes
> and the means of satisfying them, and each will be master of all.
> Thus, the child, who has only to ask and have, thinks himself the
> master of the universe; he considers all men as his slaves; and when
> you are at last compelled to refuse, he takes your refusal as an act
> of rebellion, for he thinks he has only to command. All the reasons
> you give him, while he is still too young to reason, are so many
> pretences in his eyes; they seem to him only unkindness; the sense of
> injustice embitters his disposition; he hates every one. Though he has
> never felt grateful for kindness, he resents all opposition... In vain
> everybody strove to please them; as their desires were stimulated by
> the ease with which they got their own way, they set their hearts on
> impossibilities, and found themselves face to face with opposition and
> difficulty, pain and grief. Scolding, sulking, or in a rage, they wept
> and cried all day. Were they really so greatly favoured? Weakness,
> combined with love of power, produces nothing but folly and
> suffering". (Rousseau 1921, p. 51)

*In Rousseau's Second Discourse he argues that competition for prestige
is not natural in origin but the result of social life, and this
competition leads to slavery as a concomitant of social life.*

> "Men no sooner began to set a value upon each other, and know what
> esteem was, than each laid claim to it, and it was no longer safe for
> any man to refuse it to another... Hence, the first duties of civility
> and politeness, even among savages; and hence every voluntary injury
> became an affront, as besides the mischief, which resulted from it as
> an injury, the party offended was sure to find in it a contempt for
> his person more intolerable than the mischief itself". (Rousseau 2002,
> p. 118-9)

Social life produces vanity and ambition, as Man desires recognition and
high esteem because he is a social animal. Rousseau criticized culture
and society because man as a social being "lives outside himself", he
knows himself only from the Others' judgements and opinions. (See his
*First Discourse* and Moliere's *The Misanthrope*.) It is not power, but
the wish for affirmation and self-love which perverts human beings.
(Grant 1987)

The origin of vanity, the root of corruption of man other than private
property, is man's nature or his social life. Therefore, the solution
can only be a return to the pre-social state, or the education of man --
as in Emil -- or the utopian construction of democracy -- as set out in
The Social Contract. Mead, Habermas and the radical democrats usually
quote Rousseau, but they overlook his remark that democracy is for gods.

One may find a similar observation on the nature of man in connection
with the world's oldest democracy. John Adams wrote that the demand for
equality is simply disobedience, as everyone hates superiority, but
nobody really wishes to be equal, but instead they want to be superior.
The preference for equality means the refusal of anyone being superior
but not the annihilation of the ambition for superiority and esteem.
Similarly, according to Tocqueville, everyone in a democracy searches
for a higher position. This means that democratic people are always
unsatisfied and restless. There is always competition and clashes are
inevitable. He wrote: "All are constantly seeking to acquire property,
power and reputation". (Tocqueville 1994, II p. 243) Nobody wants to
stay in his position because there are only transitory positions among
equals. (Tocqueville 1994, II p. 244) The ostensible equality begets
"restless ambition". (Tocqueville 1994, II p. 39) People under a
democracy are characterized by "envy, hatred, uncharitableness, pride
and exaggerated self-confidence", (Tocqueville 1994, II p. 7) and their
lives are in a state of permanent combat. The question is not whether
assigning equal value is possible or not. The real question is whether
the people desire such equal valuation, whether it satisfies their
wishes or not.

Even Rawls remarked bitterly: "The account of self-respect as perhaps
the main primary good has stressed the great significance of how we
think others value us... (N)ot everyone can have the highest status, and
to improve one person's position is to lower that of someone else.
Social cooperation to increase the conditions of self-respect is
impossible. The means of status, so to speak, are fixed, and each man's
gain is another's loss. Clearly this situation is a great misfortune.
Persons are set at odds with one another in the pursuit of their
self-esteem". (Rawls 1971, p. 544-6)

Before the emergence of the recent recognition paradigm and the related
reading of Hegel by G.H. Mead, the ideal of mutual recognition resulting
in peace and harmony when all demands for recognition have been
reconciled was rather rare. It can be found in a rather abstract form in
Kant (Kant 1991, § 24. p. 244) and Fichte (Fichte 2000, p. 43), who
hoped that this desire could be mutually satisfied and that this would
not necessarily result in a master-slave relationship, and suggested
that mutual recognition might create a new community containing
symmetrical relationships.

In contemporary neo-Hegelian egalitarianism, the demand for recognition
is regarded as having been the motivating force for emancipation
throughout history. (Lawrenz 2007) In this egalitarian interpretation,
conflict is the result of misrecognition. "The struggle is the necessary
consequence of their faulty self-understanding". (Anderson 2009, p. 11)
Thus, logically, mutual recognition would result in the end of conflicts
and "the end of history".

However, beside this egalitarian hope, there is still the old tradition
of the moral and political refusal of ambition. The demand for
recognition, the foundational notion of contemporary moral egalitarian
project, had to be reinterpreted in order to separate it from the
traditional meaning of ambition in the Christian tradition.

Rawls and the followers of the contemporary recognition paradigm turned
the tradition upside down, defining self-respect as the highest moral
and honourable good. Traditionally, the demand for recognition results
in conflict, instead of peace, because its aim is the submission of the
Other, that is, the enforcement of the Other to recognize the Ego.
However, this traditional interpretation of the demand for recognition
and the contemporary egalitarian one are common at one point: both can
see state as an established form of recognition. Because of the
conflicted consequences of ambition, the Christian tradition interpreted
it as sin, something that should be dominated or at least limited. But,
as we can see, the recognition paradigm broke with this tradition, and
instead of moderating ambition, it tends to celebrate it proudly.

In the recent discourse on recognition, mutual recognition is partly the
natural character of interactions as Mead described it, and partly
something that should be enforced by the democratic state. Egalitarians
would use state power for satisfying demands for recognition by
bureaucratically fabricating and enforcing the wished recognition of
certain differencies. The contemporary democratic state aims to
revolutionize interpersonal relations in order to satisfy the demands
for recognition of certain groups of people. The usual paradox is that
the egalitarian and free relations of mutual recognition should be
created by democratic state power, based on equal dignity and the
representation of each person, which would then force some people to
change their behaviour and even attitudes towards certain individuals.
The representatives of the recognition paradigm, who are usually
radicals, are rather confident of reconstructing Others' minds by means
of the state. They usually do not ask whether this "moral duty could be
enforceable or should be enforced". (Green 2010, p. 219)

The Hobbesian -- traditional -- sense of ambition, pride and honour
seems to be involved in a Hegelian master-servant model. (Green 2010, p.
213) The question is whether people demand mutual or positional respect,
and whether people are motivated by the offer of respect and satisfied
by that mutual respect or not. The practice of emancipatory movements
shows that rebels do not aim for mutuality at all.

*Increasing tensions*

In this paper I do not intend to scrutinize the presupposition of the
respect paradigm. I am not interested in whether everyone aims for
recognition, or even if people aim for it to an equal degree, or even if
they deserve recognition equally in every situation. Neither am I
interested in whether they demand equality more than recognition.

Until recently the demand for recognition -- or pride, ambition, vanity,
etc. -- was seen as a problem because of its potential for conflict, and
several institutions and social processes were maintained more or less
with the purpose of taming or ameliorating this demand and reconciling
frustrated people. It is a rather unusual development that some people
have recently placed their political and moral hopes on a wish for
recognition.

The history of democratic movements and of social life does not support
the optimism of the followers of the recognition paradigm. Even leftist
thinkers such as Rawls and Žižek have observed that this moral-political
paradigm has not solved anything. Instead of generating peace and
cooperation it has ignited conflicts, disturbing the spirit instead of
pacifying it. (Žižek 1999) In ancient Greek thought it was a common idea
that the wish for respect and avoidance of shame had socially positive
effects. It results in individuals making efforts to adapt themselves to
their social requirements. In the recognition paradigm the morally
justified emotional grounds for action is suffering, or bad feelings
arising from disrespect. In this view, adopting Others' requirements is
not a virtue of civility, but it is a form of self-deprecation,
self-abasement or submission: "In the context of the emotional responses
associated with shame, the experience of being disrespected can become
the motivational impetus for a struggle for recognition". (Honneth 1995,
p. 138) In this paradigm the dominant issue is not whether
misrecognition and shame are well founded or not, but that it is unjust
as such. This paradigm separates ambition and pride from its potential
harmful social consequences, as it relieves shame of its supposedly
positive social effects.

Why does the respect paradigm incite conflicts instead of bringing peace
and cooperation?

There are several reasons for this:

1\. The promise is satisfaction for all, but the psychological
well-being of an ambitious man is a *positional good*, which originates
from the respect of Others, therefore it cannot be distributed equally.

Recognition, in spite of the efforts of academia and benevolent moral
thinkers to reinterpret our understanding of recognition and respect, is
still a form of positional good, one which is connected to the agonistic
human condition, to competition and scarcity. The increase in morally
and politically legitimised demands for recognition thus creates more
conflict instead of bringing the promised political and psychological
harmony.

Rawls hoped that democracy would be the preference of equality. After
the failures of the socialist utopia, many people thought that shortages
or productivity difficulties occur only when there is an equality of
material goods, but they supposed that when it came to moral goods --
like self-esteem, an unmolested mind and the like -- no such problems
could exist. However, self-esteem originating from recognition seems to
be a positional good, that is, it presupposes somebody occupying
underdog positions. Finally, recognition turns out to be scarce, just
like material goods. Scarcity seems to be a perennial feature of the
human world and the "symptom of the world's fallenness". (Kirsch 2008,
p. 144)

The demand for recognition presupposes that someone else's desire has to
remain unsatisfied.

The demand for recognition -- referring to the equal right to subjective
satisfaction, self-respect, identity, an unmolested mind, etc., but at
the same time involving an upward revaluation -- requires a certain
change in the behaviour of Others, and of their mode of thinking and
feeling. Thus, the Others can no longer be fully autonomous beings.

On the one hand, the Ego wants to be free and to control his social
environment, even to the extent of controlling the thoughts and feelings
of people around him. The problem with mutual recognition is that
everyone would like to be free from the expectations of Others, and from
the pressure to conform deriving from their social environment. That is
why the demand for recognition can be satisfied only in asymmetrical
relations. It therefore results in eternal conflicts instead of a state
of peaceful and harmonious cooperation. It is closely connected to the
demand for transparency: many people demand the transparency of the
world -- institutions, other people's minds, etc. -- but all of them
indignantly refuse any demand for their own transparency and insist on
privacy and secrecy. The widespread wish for a more transparent world is
combined with a horrified refusal of our own transparency through
surveillance.

The idea of interpersonal and mutual recognition obviously contradicts
the ideal of autonomy and self-domination, because in a situation of
mutual recognition an individual should behave and even think and feel
according to the requirements of his environment. The demand for
recognition aims to change the Others' thinking about the Ego.
"Self-consciousness achieves its satisfaction only in another
self-consciousness". (Hegel 1977, §175, p. 110) This means that the
demand for recognition is for a demand to change the minds of Others,
which is incompatible with the older liberal ideal of an autonomous man,
which has been idealized until recently. Therefore, demands for
recognition generate persistent conflicts between individuals who are
taught to demand individual freedom, in the sense of autonomy --not
being formed and controlled by others from without -- and to be
authentic -- in the sense of not being conformist -- as well as to
demand recognition from others, i.e. to seek to control the behaviour of
Others and even their attitudes and feelings. (Nagel 1986) "The
individual is perpetually riven by the conflict between her desire for
the freely given recognition from the other, on the one side, and her
longing to extort this recognition through domination, even
annihilation, on the other". [ ]{.underline} (McNay 2008, p. 44)

2\. Social reconstruction rarely occurs without there being some losers,
and thus rarely happens without some resistance. The contemporary
egalitarian, therefore, would use force to transform certain
institutions and interpersonal relations in order to provide recognition
to some, while this would involve others losing their present
recognition (called "privileges" by reconstructivist actors).

The political issue concerns whether these ambitious people, who demand
recognition, can live an ordered and peaceful life without political
order. Two possible solutions can be identified: one would eliminate
this ambitious character of man by education or religious or ideological
conversion, while the other would limit the satisfaction of their
ambitions by means of enforcement or education, and offer some form of
compensation. The promise of contemporary democracy is the psychological
well-being and satisfaction of each individual. In practice, however, it
is clear that this psychological well-being can only be enjoyed by some
people. I will call this groups the privileged democrats.

3\. The demand for recognition is a demand for status. Therefore, the
real question is whether people demand equal respect, and whether they
are satisfied by that or not. The theoreticians of the recognition
paradigm use an allegedly moral argument -- the notion of mutual
recognition -- to support the ambitions of a realist type of man, and
finally these moral egalitarians find themselves in the trap of
agonistic democracy. In the minds of the academic representatives of the
recognition paradigm there is the notion of an idealized, mutual kind of
recognition, which leads humankind towards egalitarian peace and harmony
-- but in the minds of their fellow activists there is a competitive
form of recognition connected to occupying the position of master.

The recent fashion for egalitarian recognition is based on the
re-evaluation of the notions of ambition and pride, in opposition to the
Christian tradition in order to revolutionize face-to-face,
intersubjective relations and to change the nature of master-slave
relations. Followers of this trend would realize their goals through a
radical reinterpretation of ambition and pride, the characteristic name
of the annual march of the constituency of the politics of recognition.
As Coin Bird wrote

> "In rejecting those sorts of respect that are owed to some more than
> others, Kantians hope to split their concept of respect off from the
> hierarchical bedrock in which the language of respect has historically
> often found a home. Instead of construing respect in terms of a
> vertical sensitivity to superiority and inferiority, contemporary
> Kantians think of it in horizontal terms, defining an "egalitarian
> plateau" below which none must fall. In this way, the modern ethos of
> equal dignity for all can be insulated from the ancien regime
> discourse of honour and merit along with all of its hierarchical and
> inegalitarian connotations". (Bird 2004, p. 209)

Even for Kant, moral respect has a hierarchical meaning, including
reference to authority and submission. (Bird 2004, p. 213-4) People
outside academia, however, use recognition in a non-egalitarian sense
that motivates and mobilizes them, and not in its egalitarian and mutual
meaning.

The question is whether the meaning of recognition has shifted in this
egalitarian direction among people in general and not only among a small
leftist circle, and whether people in democracy have actually changed.
That is, whether activists are publicly demanding the kind of
egalitarian and universalistic recognition constructed by leftist
intellectuals or whether they continue to understand recognition in its
traditional sense, which entails one person prevailing over another and
subduing them. Obviously, there is a difference between giving reasons
for equal treatment and giving the reasons that motivate people to
provide equal treatment.

4\. Moral criticism of non-recognition amounts to the moral criticism of
domination of one over another, or of any kind of asymmetry. Domination
and servitude are translated as non-recognition by Hegel. Hence, a
Hegelian may argue that achieving mutual recognition would mean the end
of domination. Moral progress is usually interpreted as a way toward the
end of domination, and toward antinomian freedom and equality. A society
based on people mutually respecting each other would be non-coercive,
but the way there may contain endless disrespect or misrecognition. It
also involves enforcement, so the respect-based argument cannot be used
to vindicate a respectful, morally egalitarian society. Meliorism or the
perfectionism of the recognition paradigm cannot be reconciled with its
own demand for recognition. Someone needs to be silenced or forced into
conformity, or to be re-educated, but not recognized in order to achieve
the recognition -- or the emancipation -- of other people.

If people are predisposed to mutual recognition and equality, why does
it represent such a daunting political and moral problem, requiring huge
intellectual and political efforts for it to be realised? If most of us
are victims of misrecognition by some, why do some people want to
oppress this egalitarian and non-violent majority? And how can the
continued existence of this kind of oppressive and violent minority be
explained? Perhaps only re-educated people have this kind of
predisposition to mutual recognition.

Perfectionism is inherently disrespectful (Chan 2000, p. 109) -- any
effort to create mutually respecting people is disrespectful towards the
currently existing people -- like any reconstructionist efforts.
Re-education requires the deconstruction of the existing culture,
language, habits and institutions and of the characters of the
individuals composing it. Obviously, any form of deconstruction is
against recognition of the existing status quo. The activists of
recognition politics thus do not accept the moral obligation when it
comes to recognizing their opponents. Indeed, quite the opposite is
true. They do just the opposite, they claim that their duty is to
misrecognize certain groups or individuals in order to demolish them.
Not only the misrecognition, but even the dehumanization of their
opponents is a part of their practice. As they say, "Self-defence is no
offence".

If the interaction where the self is constructed were an open process,
it could change both sides, which may result in the submission or the
withdrawal of the demand for recognition on either side. However, this
could never be the result in the literature on the recognition paradigm.
For its followers, the only just resolution of any interaction is the
recognition of certain people whose demand for recognition is valued,
without considering the unpleasant changes that would need to be made to
the Others' mind.

Any kind of misrecognition, even if it is justified by emancipatory
arguments, increases the conflict between people, instead of bringing us
closer to mutual recognition and peaceful harmony. Thus, according to
the recognition paradigm, the intensification of the demand for
recognition will result in the outbreak of justified conflicts -- that
is, misrecognition of their opponents is justified -- for the sake of
emancipation, which will eventually lead to the peace of moral equality
and mutual recognition. This logic of emancipation is not actually
anything new. It can be found in millenarian and revolutionary texts
such as Lenin's *State and Revolution*: communism and the end of state
will be achieved by a dictatorship, a state with immensely increased
power. As Appiah concluded, "between the politics of recognition and the
politics of compulsion, there is no bright line". (Appiah 1994, p. 163)

Finally, it is apparent that not every demand for recognition is
justified, that is, not everybody "merits some recognition". (Frazer and
Honneth 2003, p. 38) It seems that there are just forms of
misrecognition. In certain cases, as with racists, sexist and other
kinds of unjust people, their psychological well-being can be overlooked
due to their unjust nature, and misrecognition can be excused.

The contentious character of the demand for respect was well described
by Hegel: the Ego, who demands recognition from the Other, implies the
Other's submission and change. If any frustration derives from
misrecognition and the misrecognized (the oppressed party) demands
recognition, he can obtain the desired recognition only if the Other
surrenders and abandons some elements of his own thinking, that is, the
Other can recognise the Ego only if the Other is changed and discards
his standards -- however deeply embedded they are in his personality and
identity -- and accept the Ego's standards. A Catholic should reject his
views on abortion, homosexuality, gay marriage, Christ, repentance,
absolution, original sin, etc. if he cannot provide the recognition
demanded for gays, atheists or Muslims. The notions of right and wrong,
beautiful and ugly, success and failure, etc. have to be reinterpreted
to be democratic and respectful. Only after changing his standards in
this way can the Other provide recognition of the not less beautiful,
less successful or wrong people.

This change is not only asymmetrical in nature, whereby only a change on
the part of the Other may result in the desired recognition of the Ego,
but it also means that the Other gives up his own original demands for
recognition. That is, he yields in front of the Ego. The Other has to be
submissive and give priority to the Ego's demands. If the Other has
property or a well-paid job, but the Ego, referring to luck egalitarian
arguments, demands recognition involving demands for a better life, the
Other is morally and politically obliged -- if he wants to avoid
committing the crime of misrecognition and oppression -- to give up his
initial claim of having rights to his property or to his decently earned
income. Or, if the Other initially demanded the recognition of his
requirements, as being deeply embedded in his identity, he can avoid
moral and political accusations, blackmailing and lynching -- that is,
pressure and enforcement -- only if he renounces his identity and
accepts that the Ego can dominate their relations and decide what are
the valid standards of recognition and what is a proper identity for the
Other.

People think or happily believe, if they are told, that they should
receive recognition because of some achievements or characteristics that
make them worthy of special attention and treatment. (Dillon 1992, p.
109) It feels insulting to be treated with less respect than one *thinks
is one's due*. (This paraphrase is based on Wolff 1998, p. 107) The
egalitarian idea of the demand for recognition in universal terms exists
in moral and political philosophy but, in practice, social actors and
movements demands first and foremost recognition on the basis of
particular characteristics they possess. (Darwall 1977)

Which kind of people win in the competition or fight for recognition may
change over the course of history or as the political circumstances
evolve, and the recognition paradigm is the contemporary vocabulary used
in service of the will to win. Recently, what is considered to be the
Other -- those who should yield and whose submission will allegedly lead
to a just and peaceful world -- includes those who are (or perceived as)
"male, cis, able-bodied, thin, white, middle to upper class or
heterosexual".

5\. Being recognized is regarded as lying at the core of one's
psychological well-being, so the demand for recognition is not only a
demand for a just order of things, but it may also serve to mobilize its
supporters. At the same time, one might wonder, how can one measure
respect in order to judge mutuality -- i.e. non-domination and justice
-- if subjective satisfaction is the ultimate measure of recognition?

Recognition is not a binary category like virginity, in the sense that
it either is or is not. Instead, recognition and misrecognition are two
ends of an endless continuum of attitudes. Therefore, someone can always
demand or claim more respect. Especially in our current narcissistic
age, there can be unlimited demands for respect in any sense, and thus
there can always be a legitimate hate and resentment because of the lack
of satisfying recognition offered to someone. What is more, "people are
sensitive not only to the way they are treated but also to the spirit in
which that treatment is afforded". (Green 2010, p. 219)

Because of the ambiguities of language and the complex nature of moral
psychology, the epistemological conflicts surrounding recognition --
that is, justice in social relations -- cannot be definitively decided
one way or another. Language cannot be divested of ambiguity, not to
mention irony and religious and artistic use of language. "To respect
something is to treat it in a certain manner or to act in particular
ways in connection with it... And there are many ways to respect things:
by showing consideration for them or taking them into account; by
keeping our distance from them and giving them room; by praising,
honouring, or worshiping them; by obeying or abiding by them; by
avoiding them; by protecting and being careful with them". (Dillon 1992,
p. 108)

Hobbes, who based his contentious anthropology on pride, described the
unavoidably ambiguous nature of recognition as originating from the
problems of language and the human condition: "a word, a smile, a
different opinion, and any other sign of undervalue, either direct in
their persons or by reflection in their kindred, their friends, their
nation, their profession, or their name." (Hobbes 1965, p. 96) Without
an arbitrator, the universal demand for recognition -- based on
subjective and contingent, or even whimsical interpretations of
individual moral psychology -- results in endless resentfulness and
anger.

\*

It is clear that the scope of politics has widened into everyday
intersubjective relations, and its activists have proudly rendered what
were earlier private issues into public ones in order to draw them into
political debates and subject them to political control. Instead of
reconciliation and an unmolested mind coming from mutual recognition,
the futile politics of recognition results in a more agonistic world,
created in the name of justice and equality, in which there are no
civilizational or moral limits for radicals who act on behalf of the
emancipation of someone.

While the concept of recognition is helpful for understanding the origin
of conflicts, the ideal of mutual recognition seems to be futile,
causing more conflicts than it resolves. In one way or another, this
paradigm falls short of producing the peaceful, harmonious and mutually
satisfying human world it promises. The widespread effort to morally
legitimize the demand and fight for recognition in political theory
seems to lead to an increase in the number of conflicts by morally
justifying them. In many cases the followers of this paradigm confess
that their paradigm leads to more conflicts but believe that these will
miraculously result in a just and peaceful world of mutual recognition.
The warlike condition of equals competing for prestige eventually
resulted in peace and hierarchy, according to Hobbes, while the
recognition paradigm hopes in vain that the quarrels and fights of
unequal people will somehow and someday bring equality, self-realization
and peaceful harmony.

**References**

Anderson, S. C. 2009. *Hegel's Theory of Recognition*, New York:
Continuum.

Appiah, A K. 1994. Identity, Authenticity, Survival: Multicultural
Societies and Social Reproduction, In: Gutman A. (Ed.)
*Multiculturalism*, pp. 149-164. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

Benhabib, S. The 1985. Utopian Dimension in Communicative Ethics*. New
German Critique*, (35): 83-96.

Bird, C. 2004. Status, Identity, and Respect, *Political Theory*, 32(2):
207-232.

Bourdieau, P. 1994. *Language and Symbolic Power*. Cambridge: Polity
Press.

Bourdieau, P. 1990. *In Other Words*, Stanford: Stanford University
Press.

Carter, I. 2011. Respect and the Basis of Equality, *Ethics*, 121(3):
538-571.

Chan, J. 2000. Legitimacy, Unanimity and Perfectionism. *Philosophy &
Public Affairs*, 29 (1): 2-109.

Darwall, S.L. 1977. Two kinds of respect. *Ethics*, 88(1): 36-49.

Deranty, J-Ph. - Renault, E. 2007. Politicizing Honneth's ethics of
recognition, *Thesis Eleven*, 88(1): 92-111.

Dillon, R. S. 1992. Respect and Care: Toward Moral Integration.
*Canadian Journal of Philosophy*, 22(1): 105-131.

Fichte, J.G. 2000. *Foundation of Natural Right*, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Frazer, N. - Honneth, A. 2003. *Redistribution or Recognition*, London:
Verso.

Grant, R. W. 1987. *Hypocrisy and Integrity*, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Green, L. 2010. Two Worries about Respect for Persons. *Ethics*, 120(2):
212-231.

Gutman, A. - Thompson, D. 1996. *Democracy and Disagreement*. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

Hegel, G.W.F. 1997. *The Phenomenology of the Spirit*, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Henrie, Mark, Re-Constituting American Conservatism, *Modern Age*, Fall
1999, vol. 41, no. 4. pp. 368-374.

Hobbes, T. 1965. *Leviathan*. Oxford: Clarendon.

Honneth, A. 1996. *The Struggle for Recognition*, Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.

Kirsch, A. 2008. The Fight for Recognition. *Poetry*, 193(2): 143-148.

Kojeve, A. 1969. *Introduction to the Reading of Hegel*, Ithaca NY:
Cornell University Press.

Lawrenz, J. 2007. Hegel, recognition and rights: 'Anerkennung' as a
Gridline of the Philosophy of Rights. *Cosmos and History:* *The Journal
of Natural and Social Philosophy*, 3(2-3):153-169.

Lenin, V.I. 1992. *The State and Revolution*, London: Penguin.

McNay, L. 2008. *Against Recognition*. Cambridge: Polity.

Montaigne de, M. 1991. *The Complete Essays*. London: Penguin Books.

Nagel, Th. 1986. *The View from Nowhere*. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Rawls, J. 1971. *A Theory of Justice*. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.

Roth, M. S. 1985. A Problem of Recognition: Alexandre Kojève and the End
of History. *History and Theory*, 24(3): 293-306.

Rousseau, J-J. 1921. *Emil*. London: J.M. Dent and Son.

Rousseau, J-J. 2002. *The Social Contract and The First and Second
Discourses*. New Haven-London: Yale University Press.

Taylor, Ch. 1994. The politics of recognition. In: Gutmann A. (Ed.) New
Jersey: *Multiculturalism*, Princeton University Press.

Tocqueville de, A. 1994. *Democracy in America* vols I-II. London:
Everyman's Library.

Wolff, J. 1998. Fairness, Respect, and the Egalitarian Ethos.
*Philosophy & Public Affairs*, 27(2): 97-122.

Žižek, S. 1999. *The Ticklish Subject: The Absent Centre of Political
Ontology*. London: Verso.

[^1]: "Symbolic violence is exercised only through an act of knowledge
    and practical recognition which takes place below the level of the
    consciousness and will and which gives all its manifestations --
    injunctions, suggestions, seduction, threats, reproaches, orders or
    calls to order -- their "hypnotic power"." (Bourdieau quoted by
    McNay 2008, p. 34)
