**[Reconsidering Post-Modern Liberal Conservatism]{.underline}**

Vicente Pozo[^1]

**Abstract:** The aim of this essay is to evaluate whether John Gray's
short-lived "post-modern liberal conservatism" is a more defensible
position compared to the radical pluralism later adopted by the author.
It first reconstructs Gray's post-modern liberal conservatism, analyzes
his shift toward radical pluralism, and evaluates whether this
abandonment was justified. Since Gray rarely argues against his previous
position, it is tested against the arguments directed at Rorty's
post-modern liberalism, a position which Gray associated with his own.
Subsequently, the viability of Gray's radical pluralism is examined in
its own right. The essay concludes that post-modern liberal conservatism
constitutes the more viable alternative, since it withstands the
arguments leveled against Rorty while avoiding the antinomies of Gray's
later stance.

**Keywords:** John Gray; post-modern liberal conservatism;
post-liberalism; value-pluralism; modus vivendi; Richard Rorty;
liberalism; post-modernity

In the context of post-modernity, characterized by fragmented knowledge,
the question of how to justify our political arrangements is a troubling
one. There appears to be no natural law to appeal to, and the projects
that still harbor the intellectual *hybris* of Enlightenment rationalism
prove misguided at best. While some might instinctively deny this
outlook, John Gray takes it seriously to its ultimate consequences. One
of his attempts at responding to the challenges of post-modernity was
formulated in the early 1990's under the label of "post-modern liberal
conservatism", a radically historicist defense of the liberal order in
its most fundamental form, the institutional legacy of civil society.
However, this view was quickly displaced by Gray himself as he turned to
embrace a more radical form of pluralism, one which does not necessitate
liberalism and sees it as merely another tool for achieving peace.

Given its brief life, post-modern liberal conservatism has received
little scholarly attention. This essay seeks to redress that gap, and to
assess whether Gray's abandonment of post-modern liberal conservatism in
favor of radical pluralism was warranted, or whether the former remains
the more defensible stance. It first reconstructs Gray's post-modern
liberal conservatism, while later analyzing his shift toward radical
pluralism. The arguments against his previous position are then
evaluated. Since Gray scarcely argues against post-modern liberal
conservatism, this study instead tests whether his arguments against
Rorty's post-modern liberalism --associated by Gray with his own view--
hold up. After this, his radical pluralism is put to the test, with main
emphasis on Michael Bacon's critique. The argument advanced here is that
Gray's post-modern liberal conservatism is the more viable position,
since it withstands the arguments leveled against Rorty and avoids the
antinomies of Gray's later stance.

**[Post-liberalism and post-modern liberal conservatism]{.underline}**

What Gray calls "post-modern liberal conservatism" is a stance that was
developed during his "post-liberal" phase, one which was most clearly
exhibited in the essays that comprise *Post-liberalism.* Post-liberalism
arises in response to what Gray identifies as a "fundamentalist or
doctrinal liberalism, according to which liberal institutions framed the
only fully legitimate regime for the whole of humankind" (1996 \[1993\],
p. vii). In post-liberal theory, "liberal practice is defended not as
the application of a universal political morality but as an historical
inheritance which meets human needs in the context of late modernity"
(1996 \[1993\], p. vii). And thus, from this perspective: "the failures
of foundationalist liberal political philosophy are accepted as final
and not to be lamented, since we have all we need in the core
institutions of liberal civil society" (1996 \[1993\], p. vii).

Gray's post-liberalism follows a historicist approach, though not
unequivocally so. This is because during Gray's post-liberal phase there
is an ambivalence between a historicist defense of liberal institutions
and the idea of objective value-pluralism[^2]. This is clearest in his
"What is dead and what is living in liberalism?" essay (1996 \[1993\]),
in which he attempts to reconcile both positions, invoking Michael
Oakeshott --for his historicist defense of civil association-- and
Isaiah Berlin --for his liberalism founded on radical value-pluralism.
The argument developed here is that liberalism as a political philosophy
is dead, given that: "none of the four constitutive elements of
doctrinal liberalism -- universalism, individualism, egalitarianism and
meliorism -- survives the ordeal by value-pluralism" (1996 \[1993\], p.
284). The argument then takes a historicist turn, as Gray concludes that
"what is living in liberalism is the historic inheritance (...) of a
civil society whose institutions protect liberty and permit civil peace"
(1996 \[1993\], p. 284). And this kind of political order is the most
apt for "all or virtually all contemporary cultures, which harbour a
diversity of incommensurable conceptions of the good" (1996 \[1993\], p.
284).

The two arguments are distinct, and although they may reinforce each
other, no relation of necessity binds them. This ambivalence is key to
explaining his later abandonment of the post-liberal view. Gray
similarly develops two different arguments in favor of post-liberalism
in his postscript to *Liberalisms*, in which he argues that foundational
liberal philosophy must be abandoned both because of the indeterminacy
of its own principles and its lack of historical grounding:

A central disability of liberal ideology, then, in addition to the
indeterminacies infecting its constitutive principles, is its blindness
to the historical singularity of its distinctive forms of self-identity
and self-understanding. If we abandon the delusive perspective of
universality, however, then we can see liberal society as a historical
achievement, an inheritance of institutions and traditions which informs
our thought and practice in profound ways, but which we are bound to
acknowledge has no universally apodictic character. (Gray 1989, p. 240)

He develops this purely historicist line --against doctrinal or
foundational liberalism and in favor of post-liberalism-- in his essay
"The politics of cultural diversity" (1996 \[1993\]) under the label of
"post-modern liberal conservatism", which Gray chose to associate his
position to that of Richard Rorty[^3]. Most specifically, it resembles
Rorty's "postmodernist bourgeois liberalism" (1991), a label which he
applies to himself --and also to Michael Oakeshott and John Dewey-- to
describe a defense of liberal institutions that disposes of any
ahistorical philosophical foundation. In this essay, the argument is
historicist through and through, as it defends a particular political
order transmitted through tradition and presents it as most apt for the
historical condition of liberal individuals living in a post-modern
world.

The single most important premise on which Gray relies is the idea that
modern life is defined by living in "societies which are not unified by
any single cultural tradition, but which contain a variety of traditions
and ways of life" (1996 \[1993\], p. 253). Gray describes our societies
as encompassing a "kaleidoscopic diversity of attitudes to sexuality and
gender, death and the human condition, even as they harbour a prodigious
diversity of ethnic inheritances and styles of life" (1996 \[1993\], p.
253).

However, this plurality of traditions and ways of life can be observed
not only at the societal level but also within the individual[^4]. The
experience of marginality is integral to the identity of the modern
individual: "because we belong to many different and often discrepant
networks and communities, we belong wholly to none of them" (1996
\[1993\], p. 263). Because of this, the role of government is best
understood as confining itself to maintaining peaceful coexistence:

In the subtle mosaic of traditions which is modern society, government
is ill-fitted to act as guardian or protector of any of the traditions
it shelters. It cannot claim to express any deep, undergirding moral
community in the society, since no such community exists. (Gray 1996
\[1993\], pp. 264-265)

What Gray is explicitly combating is a feature of modern thought that he
calls a "modern heresy", the idea that "political orders ought to embody
or express the cultural identity of homogeneous moral communities" (1996
\[1993\], p. 254). Gray then goes on to describe why socialism,
liberalism, and also conservatism commit this heresy. The most obvious
case is, of course, socialism, as it is central to Marxism that
contingent human identities --the only ones that actually exist-- are
the product of a mode of production that falsifies true human essence,
whose expression would be made possible in a Communist society.

In the case of liberalism, Gray first describes the liberal individual
as "a cultural achievement perhaps more precious than any other
bequeathed to us by European civilization" (Gray 1996 \[1993\], p. 259).
However, the mistake of liberalism --as exemplified by authors such as
Mill-- is treating it as more than a historical contingency: "to deny
the historical reality of liberal individuality is then absurd, but to
turn it into a universal theory -- or, after the fashion of the
Enlightenment, to appoint it to the *telos* of history -- is to traffic
in illusions" (Gray 1996 \[1993\], p. 259).

Besides the charge against both Marxism and liberalism of harboring this
modern heresy, it is Gray's charge against conservative criticism of
liberalism that is most interesting, since here the modern element is
far less obvious:

The conservative theorist, like the communitarian critic of liberalism
from the Left, moves unreflectively from the truth that we are none of
us unencumbered or disembodied selves to the very different, and indeed
manifestly false proposition that we are, or ought to be radically
situated selves -- that is to say (...) selves whose identity is
contoured by membership in a single moral community and mirrored in the
institutions of a single political order. (Gray 1996 \[1993\], p. 261)

Here, communitarian conservatism commits the modern heresy by proposing
a seamless community, and it is myopic in not taking into account the
fact that the modern individual does not belong to any single community
exclusively. Gray's post-modern liberal conservatism precisely avoids
the modern heresy and, in Hobbesian spirit, proposes a much more modest
role of government, which is "to keep in good repair what Oakeshott
calls civil association -- that structure of law in which, having no
purpose in common, practitioners may coexist in peace" (Gray 1996
\[1993\], p. 265). According to Gray, this is not only better suited to
modern societies, but also a better reading of European history,
following Oakeshott, he states: "the condition of moral complexity to
which I have alluded is not a novelty of modern decadence, but instead a
phenomenon that manifests itself in European life at least since the
late-medieval period" (1996 \[1993\], p. 263). But what is post-modern
in post-modern liberal conservatism is that:

In coming to understand liberal individuality as an appropriate
rendition of our experience as moderns, however, we abandon the
distinctively modern (or Enlightenment) project of grounding liberalism
on the universal maxims of autonomous reason. \[In\] recognizing the
time-bound modernity of the liberal individual we do not (...)
deconstruct the individual, but rather initiate a form of post-modern
individualism that is fully conscious of its own historical
particularity. (Gray, 1996 \[1993\], p. 259)

In this, the post-modern individual resembles Rorty's liberal
ironist[^5], a figure who is fully aware of the contingency of his or
her community's practices. Since we no longer need to rely on the
secular myths that upheld the liberal order, "we acquire the paradoxical
character of post-moderns, heirs to all the achievements of modernity,
but not to its seminal myths" (1996 \[1993\], p. 269). The challenge,
then, is to defend a political order that we know both not to be rooted
in human nature and to be historically particular. Gray himself
acknowledges the fragility of this arrangement, yet he concludes on a
hopeful note, envisioning "a form of political solidarity that does not
depend on shared moral community, but only on the mutual recognition of
civilized men and women" (1996 \[1993\], p. 271).

**[The shift to radical pluralism]{.underline}**

This hope for a foundationless liberal political order does not last, as
Gray explicitly shifts away from the stance just described. Not only
from post-modern liberal conservatism but also from post-liberalism
itself. He does this explicitly in *Enlightenment's Wake*, and he
summarizes this shift in the preface to the second edition of
*Post-liberalism*:

In *Enlightenment's Wake* (...) I take the argument of *Post-liberalism*
one step further. I contend that there is no reason why the liberal
project of devising a *modus vivendi* for people who hold to
incommensurably different conceptions and values should everywhere be
best achieved by the adoption of liberal institutions. The true
successor to the liberal project is *pluralism*, the position which
affirms that the diversity of forms of ethical life is legitimately
mirrored and reflected in a variety of institutions and regimes, both
liberal and nonliberal. Pluralism is a response to the diversity of
incommensurable values and perspectives that is a peculiarly prominent
feature of early post-modernity. It relinquishes the universalist
ambitions of the Enlightenment project and of liberal theory, and
maintains that the terms of peaceful coexistence must be worked out
locally and in practice, vary considerably along with cultural and
historical contexts, and will only sometimes encompass the construction
of liberal institutions. (Gray 1996 \[1993\], p. ix)

If taken at face value, his shift seems rather minor, and it just
entails a move from a supposedly universalist to a more particularist
view. What Gray is referencing is the idea he developed in the "What is
dead and what is living in liberalism" essay in which he postulates
civil society as "a condition of prosperity and peace for any modern
civilization" (Gray 1996 \[1993\], p. 320). To fully understand the
implications of this shift, it is necessary to consider how his
diagnosis evolved. While, in *Post-liberalism*, his post-modern liberal
conservatism is seen as an adequate response to the condition of
post-modernity, in *Enlightenment's Wake* (2007a \[1995\]), it appears
as something of a half-measure. In avoiding the modern heresy, this
proposal ends up giving --according to Gray-- unwarranted privilege to a
particular political order:

In the context of emerging post-modernity, liberal practice can have no
special authority even for those cultures in which it is an historic
inheritance. For this reason, neither Rorty's post-modern bourgeois
liberalism, nor the post-modern liberal conservatism I have myself
argued for in the past, takes the full measure of the cultural
metamorphosis that the passing of the Enlightenment project comprehends
-- a transformation comparable in scale and depth with the passing of
Christianity as a unifying world-view. (Gray 2007a \[1995\], p. 234)

Gray's diagnosis in *Enlightenment's Wake* (2007a \[1995\]) is that with
the passing of the Enlightenment, there is no possibility of
re-enchantment, nor salvaging the project itself: "for us, the
post-modern condition of fractured perspectives and groundless practices
is a historical fate, which we are wise to make the best of" (Gray 2007a
\[1995\], p. 219). Yet he also rejects the post-modernist view, one
which he describes as "typically one which rejects Enlightenment reason
while retaining its commitment to a humanist emancipatory project" (Gray
2007a \[1995\], p. 219). Thus, Gray rejects two alternatives which he
recognizes that appear with the waning of the Enlightenment project, one
anti-modern (represented by MacIntyre) and other being the post-modern
alternative (represented by Rorty).

Gray (2007a \[1995\]) wholly rejects MacIntyre's prescription, arguing
against the idea of recovering an Aristotelian and Thomistic view of
morality in response to the fragmented world of post-modernity[^6].
However, what mainly concerns us here is his rejection of the
post-modern alternative. Gray characterizes Rorty's view: "Rorty
believes giving up foundationalist projects and accepting the
contingency of their practices and the fragility of liberal hopes would
strengthen liberal ironists in their commitment to their life" (2007a
\[1995\], p. 254). The post-modernist move of decoupling liberalism and
its philosophical foundations, which echoes Gray's previous stance, is
now seen as untenable. Gray's arguments against Rorty's post-modern
liberalism can be summarized in three main points: first, it tacitly
assumes a philosophy of history in which a Western model is taken as a
universal condition. Second, it underestimates the importance of the
Enlightenment philosophical foundations for the liberal order itself, as
they have taken a crucial role in liberal cultures. Third --and closely
linked to the second claim­--, it incoherently retains a commitment to
human emancipation while jettisoning Enlightenment rationalism.

After rejecting both alternatives --pre-modern and post-modern-- Gray
describes his shift as going from a view "in which liberal institutions
and practices are commended for their hospitality to forms of moral
diversity marked in value-pluralism, to a pluralist view, in which
liberal forms of life enjoy no special privileges of any kind" (Gray
2007a \[1995\], p. 214). Gray frames this as a consequence of the
passing of the Enlightenment, after which:

*Pluralist* forms will emerge, animated by the goal of facilitating a
*modus vivendi*, not only or primarily among different personal
life-plans or conceptions of the good, but first and foremost among
different communities and their associated cultural traditions. Such
pluralist institutions may reasonably adopt elements of liberal practice
where that is a living historical inheritance which meets contemporary
human needs; but the pretensions of liberal societies to be germs of a
universal civilization must be forgone. (Gray 2007a \[1995\], p. 233)

According to Gray, this sort of arrangement not only relinquishes the
universalist pretensions of Rortyan liberalism, but also abandons any
priority given to the liberal order for the achievement of *modus
vivendi*: "we may reasonably anticipate that liberal practice will be
reformed, or abandoned, when it becomes manifest that they do not best
facilitate the satisfaction of human needs in the late modern context of
deep cultural diversity" (Gray 2007a \[1995\], p. 234). The support for
this *modus vivendi* pluralism is coupled with a disposition --or mode
of thinking-- of "releasement" that Gray suggests we can find in
Heidegger, "most particularly in the mode he calls *Gelassenheit*, which
is the mode of 'releasement' in which we let things be rather than
aiming willfully to transform them or subject them to our purposes"
(Gray 2007a \[1995\], p. 229).

**[On the plausibility of foundationless liberalism]{.underline}**

Gray says little about why he rejects his earlier stance, but since he
has admittedly linked his view to Rorty's he likely believes that at
least some claims he levels against Rorty's post-modern liberalism also
apply to his own post-modern liberal conservatism. Because of this, it
is convenient to take Rorty's liberalism as a foil, and to examine the
three main points that are leveled against it, while also evaluating
whether each of them applies to Gray's previous stance.

The first one is the charge of universalism. This point most clearly
applies to his own former view, since he takes it as a point of
departure, and also believes his view resembles Rorty's "in attempting a
radically historicist reformulation of liberal theory, in which the
near-universal authority of liberal institutions is preserved" (Gray
1996 \[1993\], p. xviii). Gray believes there is no basis for the
universalist pretensions of Rorty's liberal utopia[^7]. As Gray notes:
"why should practitioners of non-liberal forms of life give up the
project of renewing them, merely because it collides with the local
practices of liberal societies, as Rorty conceives of them?" (1995
\[1986\], p. 93). However, Gray (2007a \[1995\]) also argues that
Rorty's view tacitly relies on a philosophy of history, a claim that
seems exaggerated. As Michael Bacon points out, in Rorty's utopia there
is a difference between universal validity and universal reach: "he is
firm in the view that achieving that utopia cannot be presupposed but
can only stem from free discussion" (2007, p. 94). Rather than a
conviction of universality --which a philosophy of history would imply--
it is an open-ended hope.

Much the same holds for Gray's own universalism in *Post-liberalism*, in
which he maintains that civil society might not be "universal in fact.
Its universality is that of a necessary condition, in virtually all
contemporary historical contexts (...) of a common life for those with
divergent values and conceptions of the world" (Gray 1996 \[1993\], p.
320). Here, Gray's position is very similar to Rorty's in its assumption
of a universality of reach. Whether it rests on a philosophy of history
is secondary; Gray's larger point --that any hope for universalism is
completely unwarranted-- remains compelling.

> The second charge concerns whether liberal cultures require
> Enlightenment foundations to survive. This argument applies to both
> proposals, given that both of them represent radically historicist
> defenses of the liberal order. Gray (although emphasizing the case of
> the US) argues that liberal cultures require their Enlightenment
> foundations, "precisely because the universalist claims of liberal
> philosophy have become embedded in the public culture of liberal
> societies" (2007a \[1995\], p. 262). Against this premise that the
> liberal order requires firmly held philosophical convictions, one can
> respond in Oakeshottian fashion that the relationship is inverted, as
> Michael Bacon (2004) does following Brian Barry, when he argues that
> the "philosophical articulation of liberalism was not an *a priori*
> justification but an *a posteriori* rationalization, and thus
> liberalism has no need of the sort of philosophical grounding of which
> writers like MacIntyre and Gray believe it is now being deprived" (p.
> 64).

Yet this does not fully respond to the claim that this relationship has
transformed into a symbiotic one, given how embedded the Enlightenment
premises are in liberal cultures. Against this empirical claim, one can
respond, as Rorty (1997) himself did, maintaining that Gray's prediction
is simply overly pessimistic, and that "maybe he is right that political
hope cannot survive in a post-modernist intellectual climate. But maybe
it can" (p. 50). It follows that both proposals must be taken as wagers.
Here Gray's third point becomes relevant, since the stakes in Rorty's
wager seem unreasonably high. As Gray (1995 \[1989\]; 2007a \[1995\])
correctly points out, there is a strong element of human emancipation
and self-creation in his post-modern liberalism that owes much to the
Romantic movement and to the Enlightenment itself. Nonetheless, this is
not the case in his own post-modern liberal conservatism, which is a
much more modest, Hobbesian stance. What is being defended is the legacy
of civil society, not individual self-creation but mere peaceful
coexistence. Therefore, the plausibility of not needing to rely on any
philosophical foundations at all is much higher than in Rorty's case.

As becomes clear, while the charges against Rorty can be taken as enough
to reject his post-modern liberalism, this is not the case with Gray's
post-modern liberal conservatism. This stance can withstand these three
charges if it relinquishes its universalist pretensions --which do not
play a central role in it-- while maintaining the historicist
justification of liberal practice. It does require a wager against
Gray's empirical predictions but it is one that seems quite plausible.
Up to this point, the arguments have followed an historical logic, in
the sense that Gray justifies his shift by claiming that this view is no
longer apt for current conditions. However, Gray's later pluralist
project pulls the thread of value-pluralism further, making
value-pluralism itself the core of its justification, thus leaving the
historicist reasons for the shift in the background.

**[The fate of pluralism without liberalism]{.underline}**

After abandoning post-liberalism, Gray comes to rely heavily on the
argument of value-pluralism, radicalizing his project toward its
furthest conclusions. Thus, Gray arrives at a position that, while
philosophically coherent at first glance, turns out to be highly
problematic for reasons discussed in the following section. The seeds of
this are already evident in earlier works, in which Gray describes his
view of the role of philosophy: "philosophy may be critical or
subversive of practice without thereby founding one set of practices or
grounding any single form of life"[^8] (1989, p. 163). And although this
stance predates the shift in *Enlightenment's Wake*, it is quite
explanatory of the later progressive thinning of his political proposal.
The reliance on value-pluralism can already be seen in *Enlightenment's
Wake*, where he argues that "the implications of strong value-pluralism
inexorably entail relinquishing the liberal project. Even non-standard
or agonistic liberalism is not immune to the subversive force of
value-pluralism" (Gray 2007a \[1995\], p. 212). Hence Gray's shift is
grounded not only in empirical predictions about the self-defeating fate
of the Enlightenment project, but also in his belief that the truth of
value-pluralism has political consequences.

This relation of causality has not been made clear and has led to
impasses within Gray's own thought. As Bacon (2010) suggests, despite
rejecting rationalism and the Enlightenment project, Gray seems to be
committed to elements of Enlightenment liberalism in the defense of his
*modus vivendi.* This is perfectly exemplified by Gray's claim that
believers in universal religions suffer from illusions[^9], but also by
the requirement of abandoning those beliefs in favor of value-pluralism:

Conflicts arising from the clashing universalist claims of religious
fundamentalists are founded on errors. Internalising the truth of
value-pluralism within a human subject or a culture has the effect of
dissolving such rivalries. In this way accepting the truth of value
pluralism can reduce conflicts among values and promote *modus vivendi*.
(Gray 2000b, p. 91)

If philosophy plays a subversive role in political practice, it must
then be because individuals must internalize the truth that has been
arrived at. This explains why Gray remains insistent with his belief
that "*modus vivendi* rests on the belief that value-conflict is a
natural feature of human life, and for that reason *modus vivendi*
cannot be decoupled from value pluralism" (Gray 2007b, p. 224). If
Gray's *modus vivendi* pluralism requires us to relinquish our illusions
in favor of accepting the truth of value-pluralism, then it can be
argued that Gray's project "replicates the Enlightenment concern to
replace unfounded belief with rationally justified knowledge" (Bacon
2010, p. 377). Paradoxically, then, in aiming for a radical pluralism
that is more coherent with value-pluralism, and at the same time, is
more apt than his previous positions in the face of the self-defeat of
the Enlightenment project, Gray returns to its rationalist pretensions.

Another issue is that in defending a form of *modus vivendi* that goes
beyond the liberal political order --or does not require it--, Gray is
formulating a very abstract arrangement that risks being one in which
"anything goes". To solve this, Gray (2000a) formulates the idea of
universal values that ground a universal minimum moral standard. Gray
insists that such idea does not ground a universal morality[^10], but as
Bacon suggests:

He proposes a standpoint that is said to be universal. He thinks that
the universal minimum means that he can criticize worldviews and
moralities from the outside without committing himself to the
Enlightenment project that prescribes a single way of life. The problem,
however, is that this response comes at a cost, namely, it conflicts
with value pluralism. (Bacon 2010, p. 382)

In the need for the acceptance of the truth of value-pluralism, and the
proposal of this universal minimum moral standard, Gray falls back into
the transformative and universalist elements of the Enlightenment
project (Bacon 2010). This signifies a betrayal of his own politics of
releasement, as the fact that this disposition alone cannot sustain a
defense of *modus vivendi*, and that Gray must therefore rely on
remnants of Enlightenment rationalism, illustrates the difficulty
*Gelassenheit* faces in avoiding nihilism and political quietism. As
Peter Lassman suggests: "if western civilization, whether the product of
the Enlightenment or not, is so doomed then why bother to defend any
form of liberalism, *modus vivendi* or otherwise, at all?" (2007, p.
101).

Consequently, Gray's later pluralism faces a "two-horned problem":
either a retreat into political quietism/nihilism, or a relapse into the
Enlightenment project through the universal minimum moral standard and
the demand to internalize the truth of value-pluralism. Both cannot be
coherently held at once. By process of elimination --following Gray's
own diagnosis-- the only feasible alternative to this undesirable
scenario is the wager of post-modern liberal conservatism. This avoids
the nihilist consequence of *Gelassenheit* because it defends a specific
historically grounded political order, one that expresses the modern
European notion of individuality (Gray 1989). It also avoids a collapse
back into Enlightenment rationalism because of its radically historicist
nature: a defense of particular institutions transmitted through
tradition, one that does not require anyone to accept any philosophical
conclusions.

The paradox of this scenario is that in searching for a more coherent
value-pluralism that takes itself seriously and has political
implications, Gray has arrived at a dead end: either accept one of two
equally undesirable conclusions, or cling to a proposal that is
untenable in its entirety. And although the alternative might seem
uncertain in that it is indeed a wager, one might still borrow from
Rorty's notion of political hope, one that does not require much
philosophical weaponry, given that "philosophy is a good servant of
political hope, but a bad master" (Rorty 1997, p. 50).

This essay has reconstructed post-modern liberal conservatism and shown
why it constitutes a preferable alternative to Gray's radical pluralism.
While it is reasonable to concede the point to Gray and relinquish its
universal pretensions, this is not central to this proposal. What
matters most is the "method" itself; the radically historicist
justification is precisely what steers it clear of the antinomies of
Gray's later view. The challenge to post-modern liberal conservatism is
that it remains a wager, and thus it requires the confidence of
post-modern individualists, who, while aware of the historical
contingency of their practices, are able to defend them because they are
the best available means of maintaining peaceful coexistence. Its chief
strength lies in offering an allegiance without philosophical
foundations, yet firmly anchored in historical experience. Moreover,
because of its non-ideological character, it allows for flexibility in
its defense when engaging in politics. It can be said that this proposal
shares Rorty's belief that liberalism can survive without Enlightenment
foundations, while avoiding his emancipatory pretensions. And while Gray
may argue that it belongs to the past, it appears to be a necessary
wager in an era where no stronger form of solidarity remains available.

**References**

Bacon, M. 2010. Breaking up is hard to do: John Gray's complicated
relationship with the liberal project. *Social Theory and Practice*,
36(3):365--384.

---------. 2007. *Richard Rorty: Pragmatism and political liberalism*.
Lexington Books.

---------. 2004. 'That\'s the way we happen to do things around here':
Richard Rorty and political liberalism. Doctoral dissertation, London
School of Economics and Political Science. ProQuest Dissertations
Publishing.

Gray, J. 2007a/1995. *Enlightenment's wake: Politics and culture at the
close of the modern age*. Routledge Classics ed. Routledge.

---------. 1995/1986. *Liberalism*. 2nd ed. University of Minnesota
Press.

---------. 1989. *Liberalisms: Essays in political philosophy*.
Routledge.

---------. 1996/1993. *Post-liberalism: Studies in political thought*.
Routledge.

---------. 2007b. Reply to critics. In J. Horton and G. Newey (eds.),
*The political theory of John Gray*, pp. 211--236. Routledge.

---------. 2000a. *Two faces of liberalism*. The New Press.

---------. 2000b. Where pluralists and liberals part company. In M.
Baghramian and A. Ingram (eds.), *Pluralism: The philosophy and politics
of diversity*, pp. 85--102. Routledge.

Lassman, P. 2007. Pluralism and its discontents: John Gray's
counter-Enlightenment. In J. Horton and G. Newey (eds.), *The political
theory of John Gray*, pp. 99--114. Routledge.

Rorty, R. 1989. *Contingency, irony, and solidarity*. Cambridge
University Press.

---------. 1995. Philosophy and the future. In H. J. Saatkamp, Jr.
(ed.), *Rorty and pragmatism: The philosopher responds to his critics*,
pp. 197--206. Vanderbilt University Press.

---------. 1997. *Truth, politics and 'post-modernism'*. Van Gorcum.

[^1]: Special thanks to the *Nueva Cultura* project (Universidad de los
    Andes, Chile) and to the de Nicola Center for Ethics and Culture at
    the University of Notre Dame.

[^2]: Gray describes his value-pluralism as a plural realism, which is
    "the view that, whereas there are definite limits on the varieties
    of human flourishing, there are many forms of life, often exhibiting
    divergent and uncombinable goods, in which human beings may
    flourish, and none of them is the one right way of life for man"
    (Gray, 1996 \[1993\], p. 297).

[^3]: "The 'post-modern liberal conservativism' argued for in this book
    resembles the position of Richard Rorty, by which it was avowedly
    inspired, in attempting a radically historicist reformulation of
    liberal theory, in which the near-universal authority of liberal
    institutions is preserved" (Gray, 1996 \[1993\], p. xviii).

[^4]: Besides this historical argument, Gray also thinks there is
    something to say about the human condition as a whole: "To a very
    considerable extent, human beings are self-defining animals: they
    differ from other animal species precisely in their ability partly
    to constitute for themselves their own identities. This is to say
    that, for humans, personal identity is not a natural fact but a
    cultural artifact. We are what we are, not because nature has made
    us this way, but because we (...) have made us what we are (..) If
    the identities of persons are artificial and not natural, if they
    vary within broad constraints imposed by our biological endowment
    and exhibit a rich variety of kinds and forms, then any essentialist
    or naturalistic conception of the human species is to be rejected as
    false if not incoherent. We are left with human beings in all the
    miscellaneous diversity with which they present themselves to each
    other" (1996 \[1993\], p. 258).

[^5]: "The citizens of my liberal utopia would be people who had a sense
    of the contingency of their language of moral deliberation, and thus
    of their consciences, and thus of their community. They would be
    liberal ironists ---people who met Schumpeter's criterion of
    civilization, people who combined commitment with a sense of the
    contingency of their own commitment" (Rorty, 1989, p. 61).

[^6]: "The self-defeatingness of the Enlightenment project, which is the
    self-undermining effect of modernity in inexorably disclosing its
    own groundlessness, is for MacIntyre reason to step back from the
    greatest moral theorist of modernity, Nietzsche, in order to
    vindicate in terms adequate to contemporary philosophical inquiry
    the pre-modern intellectual tradition of Aristotelianism,
    particularly in its central Thomistic version. For me, by contrast,
    the self-defeat of the Enlightenment project, particularly as that
    is expressed in the thought of Nietzsche, is the end-point of that
    larger and longer Western intellectual tradition of which Thomism
    was one of the most powerful syntheses. There can, in my view, be no
    rolling back the central project of modernity, which is the
    Enlightenment project, with all its consequences in terms of
    disenchantment and ultimate groundlessness. The modernist project of
    Enlightenment, though it broke with pre-modern, classical and
    medieval, thought at many points, was also continuous with it in its
    universalism and its foundationalist and representationalist
    rationalism" (Gray 2007a \[1995\], p. 226-227).

[^7]: Rorty describes his global liberal utopia as "the image of a
    planetwide democracy, a society in which torture, or the closing
    down of a university or a newspaper, on the other side of the world
    is as much of a cause for outrage as it is when it happens at home.
    This cosmopolis may be, in non-political matters, as multicultural
    and heterogenous as ever. But in this utopian future cultural
    traditions will have ceased to have an influence on political
    decisions. In politics there will be only one tradition: that of
    constant vigilance against the predictable attempts by the rich and
    the strong to take advantage of the poor and weak" (1995, pp.
    203-204).

[^8]: Gray contrasts his view with one that he attributes to
    Wittgenstein, Oakeshott and Rorty, one which posits that "philosophy
    may illuminate but cannot otherwise change practice" (1989, p. 163)

[^9]: "From the standpoint of value-pluralism, all conflicts between
    rival claims about the best life for humankind are collisions of
    illusions" (Gray, 2000a, p. 21).

[^10]: "To affirm the reality of universal human goods and evils is not
    to endorse a universal morality, such as many liberal thinkers have
    attempted to defend. Universal values are compatible with many
    moralities, including liberalism (...) There is no one regime that
    can reasonable be imposed on all. Even minimal moral standards can
    be met in different ways" (Gray, 2000a, p. 67).
