**Liberty and the Kinds of Order in Society**

James Bernard Murphy

Department of Government

Dartmouth College

Hanover NH 03755

<James.B.Murphy@Dartmouth.edu>

In 1984, John Gray published a pioneering study of Hayek's social and
political thought, titled *Hayek on Liberty* (Oxford: Blackwell). Gray
rightly sees Hayek as an eclectic liberal, who draws in thinkers ranging
from Adam Smith and Edmund Burke to Immanual Kant and J. S. Mill, among
many others. In the heyday of Keynesianism, until the early 1970s, Hayek
was seen as an eccentric champion of heterodox Austrian economics. But
as confidence in mainstream Keynesian and monetarist policy has eroded,
Hayek's stock has steadily risen. With its comprehensive, annotated
bibliography of the published works of Hayek, Gray's book set a high bar
for the future explosion of Hayek scholarship. Gray focused his
exposition and critique on Hayek's theory of social and cultural
evolution, asking whether liberty is likely to be the outcome. In this
essay, by contrast, I shall be much more narrowly focused on the
question of whether, or to what extent, social order should be thought
of as spontaneous. My question is: does Hayek's libertarian politics
rest on his notion of a spontaneous social order?

1)  **Transcending the Nature-Convention Dichotomy.**

Hayek's profound and influential reflections on the nature of order
arose from his life-long conviction that the common antithesis of nature
and convention is a disaster for understanding social order. Many
theorists today and in the past have rejected this familiar contrast,
which does, nonetheless have its contemporary defenders. G.A. Cohen, for
example, asserts: "The Sophists' distinction between nature and
convention is the foundation of all social criticism."[^1] And, whatever
its defects, the Sophists' bold antithesis was certainly a provocation
to the thought of Hayek: "Unfortunately, the Greeks' distinction between
natural and artificial has become the greatest obstacle to further
advance..."[^2] As we shall see, the division of social institutions
into what is natural and what is conventional is certainly widespread,
but far from universal. Why does Hayek so strongly object to this
commonplace? Hayek argues that the nature-convention dichotomy embodies
the assumption that all social order is either natural or deliberately
instituted, thereby ignoring the crucial role of the customary or
spontaneous order such as we find in language, law, and the market.[^3]
"Yet much of what we call culture is just such a spontaneously grown
order \[e.g. custom\], which arose neither altogether independently of
human action \[nature\] nor by design \[stipulation\], but by a process
that stands between these two possibilities, which were long considered
as exclusive alternatives."[^4]

Hayek sees this same unfortunate dichotomy in debates about
sociobiology: one side explains human behavior in terms of "instinct"
while the other side appeals to human "reason." But Hayek insists that
human conduct is more fundamentally rooted in habit and custom than in
either instinct or reason: "Just as instinct is older than custom and
tradition, so then are the latter older than reason: custom and
tradition stand [between]{.underline} instinct and reason---logically,
psychologically, temporally."[^5] Thus, Hayek in several places insists
that we replace the nature-convention dichotomy with a nature, custom,
and stipulation trichotomy and that we replace the instinct-reason
dichotomy with an instinct, custom, reason trichotomy, so that we
acknowledge the fundamental importance of the organically-evolving order
of habit and custom in human social life.[^6]

Hayek attributes this unfortunate dichotomy to the Sophists of the fifth
century and to the influence of Aristotle.[^7] He also argues that it
was not until the 18^th^ century that thinkers such as Mandeville and
Hume acknowledged the existence of phenomena that arose neither by
nature nor by deliberate design, namely, the whole realm of customary
social institutions.[^8] Hayek traces his notion of spontaneous order to
Adam Ferguson: "Nations stumble upon establishments, which are indeed
the result of human action, but not the execution of any human
design."[^9] Yet, as we shall see, several ancient Greek philosophers,
especially Aristotle, had already transcended the Sophists' dichotomy
and recognized the importance of habit and custom. More importantly,
Hayek's own theory of social order would have benefited significantly
from knowledge of Aristotle and the Aristotelian tradition. For
Aristotle offers us not just the *tertium non datur* sought by Hayek,
but also a theory of the relations of nature, custom, and reason in
human life far more sophisticated that anything in Hayek. Instead of
just turning the older dichotomy into a new trichotomy, Aristotle shows
us that these kinds of order form a nested hierarchy. In short,
Aristotle shows that the kinds of social order are mutually inclusive,
while Hayek tends to treat spontaneous and designed order as mutually
exclusive.

Hayek is certainly right that many important Greek Sophists had set
nature ([physis]{.underline}) and convention ([nomos]{.underline}) into
stark opposition.[^10] And Hayek is also right that many Greek writers
disambiguated the notion of convention into either custom
([nomō]{.underline}) or deliberate institution
([thesei]{.underline}).[^11] Yet the greatest of the Sophists had
already begun to transcend this stark dichotomy. Protagoras said:
"Learning from teaching ([didaskalia]{.underline}) requires both nature
([physis]{.underline}) and practice ([askēsis]{.underline})."[^12] Plato
also developed a version of this triad when he observed that "if one has
the natural capacity ([physei]{.underline}) for rhetoric, one can become
a famous rhetorician, provided that one also acquires knowledge
([epistēmē]{.underline}) and practice ([meletē]{.underline})."[^13] And
Aristotle agrees on the need for all three qualities: "Now some think
that we become good by nature ([physei]{.underline}), others by habit
([ethei]{.underline}), still others by teaching
([didakē]{.underline})."[^14] So all of these Greek philosophers had
already transcended the crude dichotomy between what is natural and what
is deliberately stipulated. Many Greeks, like many moderns, debated
whether learning arose by nature or by nurture, but Protagoras, Plato,
and Aristotle reject that false dilemma. They all insist that learning
requires nature, habit, and reason. Like Hayek, they see the need for
positing a reality between instinct and reason. That this fundamental
insight into the complex order of individual and social human life
should arise from a reflection upon education is characteristic of the
Greek mind. For, as John Dewey was fond of saying, there is an important
sense in which all of Greek philosophy is the philosophy of education.

2)  **Trichotomy or Nested Hierarchy?**

In Book VII of Aristotle's [Politics]{.underline} we find this cryptic
passage: "In order to become good and wise ([agathos kai
spoudaios]{.underline}) requires three things; these are nature, habit,
and reason ([physis, ethos, logos]{.underline})".[^15] Few sentences in
the Aristotelian corpus, I think, are as richly suggestive as is this
one or as much in need of both interpretation and imaginative
reconstruction. Obviously each of these terms, nature, habit, reason, is
at the center of Aristotle's conceptual vocabulary; what is less obvious
is that this ordered triad is echoed throughout his writings. From the
immediate context we can see that Aristotle is speaking in the first
place of the components of moral and intellectual self-realization: we
must begin with the right natural powers and dispositions, we must
cultivate these powers and dispositions into the right habits of
character, and we must use reason to reflectively adjust our habits in
light of our stipulated moral ideals. In this model of human
self-realization, our habits presuppose human nature but cannot be
reduced to it, just as our stipulated rational ideals presuppose our
habits but cannot be reduced to them.[^16]

Aristotle extended his triad beyond individual self-realization to the
actualization of the political community. Thus, he says in many places,
the legislator, in the deliberate stipulations of law
([nomos]{.underline}), must take into account the natural capacities of
his citizens as well as their social customs ([ethē]{.underline} or
[agraphoi nomoi]{.underline}). In the subsequent Aristotelian tradition
we find this triad employed in the analysis of several other social
institutions. In jurisprudence we find many variants of expressions for
natural, customary, and stipulated or positive law.[^17] In logic we
find John Poinsot (John of St. Thomas) asking "whether the division of
signs into natural ([naturale]{.underline}), stipulated ([ad
placitum]{.underline}), and customary ([ex consuetudine]{.underline}) is
a sound division".[^18] By natural signs he means those signs that
relate to their objects independent of human activity: smoke is a sign
of fire. By customary signs he means those signs that arise from the
collective and non-reflective practices of human communities: napkins on
a table are signs that dinner is imminent. By stipulated signs he means
those signs whose meaning is deliberately appointed by an individual, as
when a new word is introduced. Although Poinsot does not refer to
Aristotle in his discussion of the threefold division of signs, I argue
that he is offering an interpretation and extension of Aristotle's
nature, custom, and reason.[^19]

Following the lead of the theorists of order from Aquinas to Hayek,
therefore, I will now reconstruct Aristotle's triad in terms of three
fundamental concepts of order: there is the natural order to physical,
chemical, and biological processes; there is the customary order of
habitual social practices; and there is the stipulated order of
deliberate design. In Aristotelian political science, the unit of
analysis is an institution or practice (some stable pattern of human
action or interaction) and the level of analysis is natural order,
customary order, or stipulated order. Our three kinds of order form the
three dimensions of every human practice or institution, meaning that
explanation must involve analysis at the levels of the sciences of
nature, the sciences of custom, and the sciences of rational
stipulation. Thus the study of language involves the natural sciences of
psychology and physiology, the customary sciences of linguistic drift
and analogy-formation, and the rational sciences of rhetoric and logic.
Each of these levels of analysis is crucial to the explanation of the
complex order we find in language.

In accordance with Aristotle's explicit logic of classification, I have
thus far treated nature, custom, and rational stipulation as three
species of the genus "order." But this genus-species logic does not
indicate the serial and hierarchical relations among our three concepts:
nature is prior to custom and custom is prior to stipulation. Aristotle
however, offers an alternative logic of classification, which is most
clearly illustrated by his analysis of the kinds of souls. Here, instead
of defining the genus "soul" and the species of plant, animal, and human
souls, Aristotle says that the plant soul is living (that is, nutritive
and reproductive), the animal soul is living plus sensitive, and the
human soul is living and sensitive plus rational.[^20]

Aristotle implicitly treats nature, custom, and stipulation as such a
hierarchy: "In every case the lower faculty can exist apart from the
higher, but the higher presupposes those below it."[^21] Nature
represents the physical, chemical, and biological processes of the
cosmos; nature can and did exist apart from human custom and
stipulation. Human custom is rooted in the physiology of habit but
transcends habit by becoming a social system of norms. Custom
presupposes nature, but custom can exist without being the object of
rational reflection and stipulation: language existed before
grammarians. Stipulation is the synoptic order deliberately imposed upon
the pre-reflective materials of custom; reflective stipulation always
presupposes custom. By examining our triad in a variety of contexts, we
will see that this progressive hierarchy is pervasive in Aristotle's
thought. First, for Aristotle, nature, custom, and stipulation
articulate the hierarchy of the [scala naturae]{.underline}: "The other
animals for the most part live by nature ([physis]{.underline}), though
in some respects by habit ([ethos]{.underline}) as well, while man lives
also by reason ([logos]{.underline}), for he alone has reason."[^22]
Just as Hayek said that custom is "between" instinct and reason,
Aristotle says that habit is the bridge between nature and reason.

Second, nature, custom, and stipulation form the same progressive
hierarchy in individual development as they do in the scale of nature:
ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny. Aristotle says that there are three
kinds of human faculties ([dynameis]{.underline}): those that are innate
([suggenēs]{.underline}), those that come by practice
([ethos]{.underline}), and those that come from teaching
([mathēsis]{.underline}).[^23] These three faculties form a hierarchy:
"The contribution of nature clearly does not depend on us\...while
argument ([logos]{.underline}) and teaching ([didakē]{.underline})
surely do not influence everyone, but the soul of the student must have
been prepared by habit ([ethos]{.underline})."[^24] Our nature, he says,
is given at birth while our natural potentials are trained by habit;
teaching invites us to reflect on our habits and perhaps stipulate new
ones.

Third, this hierarchy plays the same role in the political development
of a community as it does in the moral development of an individual. The
first task of a legislator, says Aristotle, is to regulate the
biological nature of the citizens through eugenics
([eugeneia]{.underline} or [aretē genous]{.underline}); his second task
is to instill the proper habits in each citizen through and educational
regime aimed at developing the right political disposition ([euhexia
politikē]{.underline}); his final task is to reflect on his first two
tasks by studying political science.[^25] "We have already considered
what natures are likely to be most easily molded by the hands of the
legislator. All else is the work of education; we learn some things by
habit and other things by being taught."[^26] Just as the legislator is
responsible for attempting to shape the natural potentials and the tacit
customs of his city, so every mature person is responsible for making
the best he can of his natural potentials and his habits of character.
Yet neither the legislator nor any individual person has complete
rational control over either social customs or moral habits. So
Aristotle not only pioneered Hayek's triad of types of order, but he
also developed that triad into a nested hierarchy rather than as a
trichotomy.

The student of Thomas Aquinas who completed his commentary on the
[Politics]{.underline} of Aristotle certainly understood the
hierarchical structure of Aristotle's three concepts of order: "There
ought to be harmony among them, namely, nature, custom, and reason: for
always the latter presupposes the former."[^27] And in his commentary on
the [Nicomachean Ethics]{.underline}, Aquinas analyzes the mutually
complementary roles of nature, habit, and doctrine in the moral
development of an individual.[^28]

3)  **Hayek on Grown and Made Order.**

Hayek is well known for his emphasis on the importance of order in both
understanding the world and in understanding the human mind. Indeed,
Hayek argues that the mind and the world can only be defined in terms of
a relational order.[^29] Hayek attempts to replace the computational
model of mind, based on algorithms, with a pattern-recognition model of
mind. Instead of calculating in a linear sequence, human beings intuit
patterns and draw rough interferences. Studies of chess expertise bear
out Hayek's insights here: grandmasters do not calculate long strings of
possible moves; instead, they sense strengths and weaknesses in the
patterns of the arrayed pieces. Hayek never attempts to formally define
order, and he merely adopts a definition from L.S. Stebbings: order is
the basis for inference.[^30] Order cannot be properly defined because
it is a logically primitive concept that is presupposed in any act of
mind. In his identification of mind with the recognition of order, Hayek
follows Thomas Aquinas, who says in the prologue to his commentary on
the [Nicomachean Ethics]{.underline}: "to be wise is to establish order.
The reason for this is that wisdom is the most powerful perfection of
reason, whose characteristic is to know order."[^31]

Aristotle has no generic concept of order and Hayek is right when he
notes that we get the first philosophical treatment of order in
Augustine's treatise [De Ordine]{.underline}.[^32] But Hayek's specific
concepts of order are clearly found in Aristotle, who explicitly
articulates natural, customary, and stipulated order in his discussion
of good social order: [eukosmia]{.underline}, [eunomia]{.underline}, and
[eutaxia]{.underline} Here [kosmos]{.underline} connotes natural social
order, [nomos]{.underline} connotes customary or legal order, and
[taxis]{.underline} connotes deliberately stipulated order, as in the
order of battle.[^33] Yet, whereas Hayek strongly contrasts
[kosmos]{.underline} as spontaneous order from [taxis]{.underline} as
stipulated order, Aristotle stresses that every social institution has
all three kinds of social order. For example, Hayek strongly contrasts
the stipulated order of legislation from the spontaneous order of custom
and common law.[^34] But Aristotle notes that legal custom is often
created by deliberate stipulation in legislation.[^35]

In addition to his trichotomy of natural, customary, and stipulated
order (or instinct, custom, and reason), Hayek also develops a dichotomy
of spontaneous and designed order. Although Hayek is widely credited in
the secondary literature for pioneering the expression "spontaneous
order," Struan Jacobs argues that Karl Polanyi actually deserves credit
for introducing this concept and expression into 20^th^ century social
theory.[^36] Hayek uses a variety of terms to mark this contrast:
organism or organization, grown or made, kosmos or taxis. They are
always very sharply contrasting kinds of order: "a self-generating or
spontaneous order and an organization are distinct and ...their
distinctiveness is related to the two different kinds of rules or laws
which prevail in them."[^37] To begin with, each kind of order has a
fundamentally different kind of purpose. The designed order of an
organization, he says, promotes the purposes of those who designed it,
while a spontaneous order promotes the purposes of those myriad
individuals who participate in it.[^38] The rules governing an
organization often take the form of commands, which apply to particular
persons, while the rules governing spontaneous order generally take the
form of general laws that apply equally to all participants. He calls
the law of organizations "thesis" or legislation and the law of
spontaneous order he calls "nomos" or common law.[^39] Commands serve
the interests of the commander while laws serve the interests of the
agents; with commands, the choice of a particular action falls with the
commander while with law, the choice of a particular action falls on the
agent.[^40] In short, organizations empower leaders while spontaneous
orders empower everyone who makes use of them.

Hayek's strong conceptual contrasts between made and grown order create
the impression that any particular practice or institution must belong
either to a made or to a grown order but not both. According to John
Gray, for example, Hayek sees social order as inevitably spontaneous,
not designed.[^41] How could one and the same institution embody both
the purposes of its designer and the purposes of all who use it? How
could a single organization be governed both by commands and by general
laws? And if such mixtures were possible, then how could we distinguish
a made from a grown order?

Hayek never theorizes such mixtures or the relations between kinds of
orders. And by dividing up institutions into examples of each kind of
order, Hayek further reinforces the impression that the kinds of order
are mutually exclusive: he tells us that spontaneous order includes
"morals, religion and law, language and writing, money and the
market"[^42] while organizations include "the family, the farm, the
plant, the firm, the corporation and the various associations, and all
the public institutions, including government...."[^43] If all these
institutions can be sorted into one order or another, then the kinds of
order seem to be mutually exclusive. Yet, in other places, Hayek clearly
acknowledges the mix of these two orders in particular institutions: "A
spontaneous order may rest in part on regularities which are not
spontaneous but imposed."[^44]

The best guide we have to Hayek's thought about how to mix the kinds of
social order come from some of Hayek's specific examples of spontaneous
order: growing a crystal and creating a magnetic field with iron
filings. We cannot make a crystal in the sense of putting every molecule
in place, but "we can create the conditions under which such a crystal
will form itself."[^45] To grow a crystal or a living culture in a
laboratory, a researcher first designs a matrix in which to structure
the growth. The design of the matrix does not determine where each new
molecule or cell will be located, but it provides a pattern for that
spontaneous growth. We can design the shape of a magnet and the iron
filings and thereby predict the overall shape of the resulting
spontaneous order of filings.[^46] In his brilliant demonstration of how
spontaneous order is also the product of deliberate design, John Tomasi
develops the example of crystallization in the formation of rock candy.
Although we cannot literally construct a sugar crystal, we can construct
the matrix for the spontaneous growth of sugar crystals: thus,
candy-makers create an aseptic container, mix the sugar solution, design
the string, and even affix seed crystals to the string, as ways of
regulating the production of rock candy.[^47] In short, rock candy is at
one grown and made, spontaneous and designed. The two basic kinds of
order in society are not mutually exclusive.

Although Hayek sometimes sharply contrasts designed order with
spontaneous order, at a deeper level Hayek clearly sees that spontaneous
order in civilized society grows at the interstices of designed orders.
For example, Hayek often sharply contrasts the order of legislation to
the order of common law and custom; but at a deeper level, Hayek sees
that common law and custom grown at the interstices of legislations. The
spontaneous order of Roman and English private law grew up around the
matrix of constitutional law, simple codes, and many particular
statutes. True, the effect of that spontaneous common law was often to
overshadow or even undermine the original legislative matrix. Similarly,
the spontaneous order of markets grows up around legislative, political,
and administrative decisions that create or open new domains for
commerce. In a dramatic example of how legislation creates new markets,
the free exercise clause of the US Constitution, along with similar
provisions in state constitutions, created the conditions for a new
market in religious life, leading to the emergence of tens of thousands
of new churches in America. And the explicit suppression of
primogeniture and entail in our Constitution obviously created new
markets in land. Even nations with formal legal codes that forbid
recourse to judicial decisions nonetheless find that a common law grows
up in the interstices of the code. Over time, these original matrices
are themselves redesigned, leading to new forms of spontaneous order, as
we are now witnessing in the case of opening marriage to gay couples. So
how are we to describe these markets and these bodies of law? Are they
examples of designed or spontaneous order? The matrix is designed, but
the order around it grows up spontaneously, sometimes as predicted and
sometimes contrary to prediction.[^48]

We must not confuse the unit of analysis with the level of analysis. Our
unit of analysis is a particular institution (the family, a market, or
body of law); the level of analysis is the kind of order seen in that
institution: natural, customary, or stipulated. Hayek often simply lumps
some kinds of institutions into particular kinds of order, as when he
frequently describes the market as spontaneous or the government as an
organization.[^49] But, we can now see that these descriptions confuse
the unit of analysis with the level of analysis. Aristotle, with his
nested hierarchy of kinds of order, will say that any institution admits
of analysis on three levels. Markets rest upon the natural order of the
human propensity to truck, barter, and exchange. But that natural
propensity is decisively shaped by customs of fairness and good faith,
as well as by deliberate legal stipulations defining what can and cannot
be exchanged.

Although Hayek often points to the social division of labor as an
example of spontaneous order, I argue that there is a natural,
customary, and stipulated dimension to the division of labor in
society.[^50] So Hayek, at least in his language if not in his thought,
confuses the unit of analysis with the level of analysis. How ironic
that Hayek should blame Aristotle for the Sophists' crude dichotomy of
nature and convention when Aristotle actually pioneered the triadic
analysis of nature, custom, and stipulation favored by Hayek. How tragic
that Hayek never learned from Aristotle that institutions cannot be
parceled into kinds of order but that every institution embodies all
three kinds of order. Karl Polanyi liked to joke that whereas labor
markets were designed by nineteenth-century legislators, the
welfare-state emerged spontaneously![^51]

The assumption that spontaneous orders are numerically distinct from
designed orders has been a source of deep confusion in the whole vast
secondary literature on Hayek. Although Hayek, as we have seen,
sometimes describes spontaneous and designed order as if they were
mutually exclusive, he makes it clear in a variety of contexts that
spontaneous order usually emerges at the interstices of designed order.
Unfortunately, his commentators almost always treat spontaneous and made
order as mutually exclusive. In perhaps the most important book-length
study of Hayek's theory of spontaneous order we read: "According to this
binary vision of the world, order exists either as [cosmos]{.underline}
or as [taxis]{.underline}."[^52] One verbal contrast between Hayek and
his commentators is deeply revealing. Hayek almost always speaks of
"spontaneous order" while his commentators often speak of "spontaneous
orders". [^53] Once we speak of orders, then the temptation to treat the
kinds of order as mutually exclusive becomes irresistible: there are
countless book chapters and articles listing various examples of
"spontaneous orders": law, money, markets, mores, etiquette,
constitutions, bicycles, language, crafts, medicine, units and measures,
etc. These lists are non-denumerable because every social institution or
practice has a spontaneous dimension, for the familiar reason captured
by Robert Burns: *The best laid schemes o\' mice an\' men/ Gang aft
a-gley.* No matter how carefully a plan, organization, or code of law is
designed, over time it becomes spontaneously revised, often beyond
recognition. Justinian attempted to freeze his codification of Roman law
by forbidding all interpretation of his code. The result has been a body
of interpretation encompassing thousands of books and even more
articles. True, deliberate design plays a greater or lesser role in
various kinds of institutions, but every social practice or institution
is both spontaneous and designed. The real challenge posed by Hayek's
distinction is the one central to theories of constitutional design: how
do we design institutions with the flexibility to evolve spontaneously?

What does Hayek's theory of social order have to do with his neo-liberal
policy preferences? If the kinds of social order were truly mutually
exclusive, then it would be a disaster to attempt to subject a
spontaneous order to deliberate planning. So Hayek's rhetorical
opposition of grown and made order underwrites a very strong presumption
against efforts to impose legal and political regulations on the
spontaneous order of culture or markets. But, as we have seen, Hayek's
deeper theory of social order acknowledges that spontaneous order is
always partly made. So any particular institution might well embody both
kinds of order, meaning that Hayek's theory of social order provides no
basis in itself for rejecting the legal, political, or administrative
regulation of any institution or social practice. He may have additional
economic, legal, and political arguments against welfare-state
regulations, but his theory of social order does not, in itself, support
his neo-liberal policy preferences. True, he tells us that we must be
careful how we mix these two kinds of order: "the two principles of
order cannot be mixed in any manner we may wish."[^54] We must be
careful, he says, not to attempt to eliminate all spontaneous aspects of
order from social life. He warns against "the process of transformation
of a free, spontaneous order of society into an organization or
[taxis]{.underline}."[^55] So his theory of social order is clearly
incompatible with totalitarian policies that seek to turn cultural or
economic institutions into centrally-planned projects of mobilization.
Respect for the invaluable potential of spontaneous order rules out an
exclusive reliance on command and control. Hayek is persuasive that we
must design matrices for social and economic institutions that are
open-ended enough to permit spontaneous growth at the interstices. What
this means is that a very wide range of public policies, from
neo-liberal to social democratic, are fully compatible with Hayek's
theory of social order.

[^1]: G.A. Cohen, [Karl Marx's Theory of History: A Defense]{.underline}
    (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978): 107.

[^2]: Hayek, [New Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and
    Economics]{.underline} (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978):
    4-5. He repeats this accusation in several places: "The discussion
    of the problems with which we are concerned was long hampered by the
    universal acceptance of a misleading distinction which was
    introduced by the ancient Greeks and from whose confusing effect we
    have not yet wholly freed ourselves." Hayek, [Law, Legislation, and
    Liberty]{.underline}, vol. 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1973): 20. John Gray notes "Hayek's repudiation of the Sophistic
    nature-convention dichotomy," in his *Hayek on Liberty*, 29.

[^3]: "...these dichotomies define this area, and these processes, out
    of existence." Hayek, [The Fatal Conceit]{.underline}, ed. W.W.
    Bartley (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988): 144.

[^4]: F. A. Hayek, "Kinds of Order in Society" \[1964\], in [The
    Politicization of Society]{.underline}, ed. Kenneth Templeton, Jr.
    (Indianapolis: Liberty Press, 1979): 509.

[^5]: Hayek, [The Fatal Conceit]{.underline}, 23. "Here again we find
    that an accurate account lies [between]{.underline} instinct and
    reason" (24).

[^6]: "It therefore never became clear that what was really required was
    a three-fold division which inserted between the phenomena which
    were natural in the sense that they were wholly independent of human
    action, and those which were artificial or conventional in the sense
    that they were the product of human design, a distinct middle
    category comprising all those unintended patterns and regularities
    which we find to exist in human society." Hayek, [Studies in
    Politics, Philosophy, and Economics]{.underline}, 97. Cf. [The Fatal
    Conceit]{.underline}, 143.

[^7]: Hayek: "through Aristotle's adoption of this division \[nature or
    convention\] it has become an integral part of European thought."
    [Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics]{.underline}
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967): 96. Hayek repeats his
    critique of Aristotle elsewhere: "Current scientific and
    philosophical usage is so deeply influenced by the Aristotelian
    tradition, which knows nothing of evolution...." [The Fatal
    Conceit]{.underline}, 143.

[^8]: See Hayek, [Law, Legislation, and Liberty]{.underline}, vol. 1,
    20.

[^9]: Adam Ferguson, [An Essay on the History of Civil
    Society]{.underline} (Edinburgh: A. Millar and T. Caddel, 1767):
    187.

[^10]: "The original Greek terms...seem to have been introduced by the
    Sophists of the fifth century..." Hayek, [Law, Legislation and
    Liberty]{.underline}, vol. 1, 20. According to Guthrie, throughout
    the fifth century, nomos and physis were treated as antithetical.
    Some Sophists championed phusis (Antiphon, Callicles) while others
    championed nomos (Glaukon, Protagoras). See W.K.C. Guthrie [History
    of Greek Philosophy]{.underline} vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1969): chap. 4.

[^11]: Hayek, [Law, Legislation, and Liberty]{.underline}, vol. 1, 20.
    For a lexical study of [thesei]{.underline} in the origins of the
    notion of positive law, see James Bernard Murphy, [The Philosophy of
    Positive Law]{.underline} (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005):
    chap. 1.

[^12]: Protagoras in [Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker]{.underline}, ed.
    Hermann Diels and Walter Kranz (Berlin: Weidmannsche
    Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1954): frag. 3. Usually
    [didaskalia]{.underline} is rendered as "teaching" but Paul Shorey
    is right to argue that "learning" is fits the context better, since
    the focus is one the conditions that promote successful learning in
    the student, of which teaching is only one. Shorey traces the
    history of Protagoras's triadic conception of education through
    Plato and all the way to Cicero's [ingenii, exercitatio dicendi,
    ratio aliqua]{.underline} ([Pro Archias]{.underline}). See his
    "[Physis]{.underline}, [Meletē]{.underline}, [Epistēmē]{.underline}"
    in [Transactions and Proceedings of the American Philological
    Association]{.underline} 40 (1909): 185-201.

[^13]: Plato, [Phaedrus]{.underline} 269D.

[^14]: Aristotle, [Nicomachean Ethics]{.underline}, 1179b 20.

[^15]: [Politics]{.underline} 1332a 38. Bekker numbers from Greek text
    edited by W.D. Ross (Oxford:Clarendon Press, 1957). All translations
    from the Greek are mine.

[^16]: "According to Hayek, knowledge is dispersed throughout society
    and, further, it is embodied in habits and dispositions of countless
    men and women." Gray, *Hayek on Liberty*, 38.

[^17]: Thus the author of the [Rhetorica Ad Herennium]{.underline} (II,
    19) lists the departments of [ius]{.underline} as: "[natura, lege,
    consuetudine, indicato, aequo et bono, pacto]{.underline}". Ulpian
    famously distinguishes ([Digest]{.underline} I, 1.1) [ius naturale,
    ius gentium, ius civile]{.underline}. And Cicero ([De
    Inventione]{.underline} II, 53.160) deploys the Aristotelian scheme
    in his famous passage on the evolution of law from principles of
    nature to deliberate statutes: "Law ([ius]{.underline}) initially
    proceeds from nature, then certain rules of conduct become customary
    by reason of their advantage; later still both the principles that
    proceeded from nature and those that had been approved by custom
    received the support of religion and the fear of the law
    ([lex]{.underline})".

[^18]: John Poinsot, [Tractatus de Signis]{.underline} \[1632\], ed. and
    trans. John Deely (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985):
    269.

[^19]: For a critique and reconstruction of Poinsot's doctrine of signs,
    see James Bernard Murphy, "Nature, Custom, and Stipulation in the
    Semiotic of John Poinsot," [Semiotica]{.underline} 83 1/2 (1991):
    33-68.

[^20]: [De Anima]{.underline} (414a 29 to 415a 13).

[^21]: R.D. Hicks, [Aristotle: De Anima]{.underline} (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 1907): 335.

[^22]: [Politics]{.underline}, 1332b 2.

[^23]: [Metaphysics]{.underline} 1047b 31.

[^24]: [Nicomachean Ethics]{.underline} 1179b 21.

[^25]: See [Politics]{.underline} 1334b 30ff and 1336a 4.

[^26]: [Politics]{.underline} 1332b 8. "Now in men reason and mind are
    the goal of nature, so that the birth and training in custom of the
    citizens ought to be ordered with a view to them."
    [Politics]{.underline} 1334b 15.

[^27]: The commentary on [Politics]{.underline} 1332 a 38 reads: "[Quare
    hoc oportet consonare inter se, scilicet naturam, consuetudinem, et
    rationem: semper enim posterius praesupponit prius]{.underline}." In
    [In Libros Politicorum Aristotelis Expositio]{.underline}, ed.
    Raymundi Spiazzi (Turin: Marietti, 1951): 386.

[^28]: See Aquinas, [In Decem Libros Ethicorum Aristotelis Ad Nicomachum
    Expositio]{.underline}, ed. Raymundi Spiazzi (Turin: Marietti,
    1949): Lib. VII, lec. 10, l.14 \[2143 ff\].

[^29]: "The conclusion to which we have been led means that the order of
    sensory qualities no less than the order of physical events is a
    relational order." Hayek, [The Sensory Order]{.underline} (London:
    Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1952): 19. Later, he refers to his
    "definition of mind as a peculiar order" (46).

[^30]: Order, says Hayek, is "a state of affairs in which a multiplicity
    of elements of various kinds are so related to each other that we
    may learn from our acquaintance with some spatial or temporal part
    of the whole to form correct expectations concerning the rest, or at
    least expectations which have a good chance of proving correct."
    Hayek, [Law, Legislation, and Liberty]{.underline}, vol. 1 (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 1973): 36. Hayek here draws on
    Stebbing: "When we know how a set of elements is ordered we have a
    basis for inference." L. S. Stebbing, [A Modern Introduction to
    Logic]{.underline} (London: Methuen, 1950): 228.

[^31]: [S. Thomae Aquinatis Opera Omnia]{.underline}, ed. Robertus Busa
    SI (Stuttgart: Friedrich Frommann Verlag, 1980) vol. 4 [Sententia
    Libri Ethicorum]{.underline} (Prologue, n.1). All translations from
    the Latin are mine.

[^32]: Hayek, [Law, Legislation, and Liberty]{.underline}, vol. 1, 155n.

[^33]: See [Politics]{.underline} 1299b 16, [Nicomachean
    Ethics]{.underline} 1112b 14, and [Politics]{.underline}, 1326a 30.

[^34]: Hayek terms "nomos" as the law of spontaneous "kosmos" (private
    law) and he terms "thesis" as the law of stipulated order (taxis):
    as in constitutional and administrative law. See his [New Studies in
    Philosophy, Politics, and Economics]{.underline} (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 1978): 78.

[^35]: Aristotle, "On the Motion of Animals," 703a 29.

[^36]: Struan Jacobs, "Michael Polanyi's Theory of Spontaneous Orders,"
    [Review of Austrian Economics]{.underline} 11 (1999): 111-127, at
    116-118.

[^37]: Hayek, [Law, Legislation, and Liberty]{.underline}, vol. 1, 2.

[^38]: Hayek, [Law, Legislation, and Liberty]{.underline}, vol. 1, 38.

[^39]: "a general rule that everybody obeys, unlike a command proper,
    does not necessarily presuppose a person who has issued it. It also
    differs from a command by its generality and abstractness." Hayek,
    [The Constitution of Liberty]{.underline} (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 1960): 149.

[^40]: "The action performed according to such commands serves
    exclusively the purposes of him who has issued it. The ideal type of
    law, on the other hand, provides merely additional information to be
    taken into account in the decision of the actor." Hayek, [The
    Constitution of Liberty]{.underline}, 150.

[^41]: "The order we find in social life cannot, for these reasons, be
    the product of any rational design, and it can never become so.
    Social order is and must always be a spontaneous formation." Gray,
    *Hayek on Liberty* (Oxford Basil Blackwell, 1984), 26.

[^42]: Hayek, [Law, Legislation, and Liberty]{.underline}, vol. 1, 10.
    "We find the spontaneous formation of self-regulating structures in
    the growth of language, the development of law and in the emergence
    of moral norms." Gray, *Hayek on Liberty*, 31.

[^43]: Hayek, [Law, Legislation, and Liberty]{.underline} vol. 1, 46.

[^44]: Hayek, [New Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and
    Economics]{.underline}, 74.

[^45]: Hayek, "The Kinds of Order in Society," 508.

[^46]: "We could never produce a crystal or a complex organic compound
    if we had to place each individual molecule or atom in the
    appropriate place in relation to the others. We must rely on the
    fact that in certain conditions, they will arrange themselves in a
    structure possessing certain characteristics." Hayek, [Constitution
    of Liberty]{.underline}, 160.

[^47]: Tomasi, [Free Market Fairness]{.underline} (Princeton: Princeton
    University Press, 2012) 153: "The crystals grow according to their
    own internal principles; no one controls or intends the precise
    outcome of that process of growth. And yet at a more general level,
    human intentionality and conscious design pervade the entire
    process."

[^48]: Hayek says that although we cannot predict where particular
    elements of a spontaneous order will be located, we can make
    "pattern predictions" about the overall shape of a spontaneous
    order. See Bruce Caldwell, [Hayek's Challenge]{.underline} (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, 2004): 310.

[^49]: "Such spontaneous orders we find not only in the working of
    institutions like language and law\...but also in the relations of
    the market." Hayek, "Kinds of Order in Society,"509.

[^50]: James Bernard Murphy, [The Moral Economy of Labor: Aristotelian
    Themes in Economic Theory]{.underline} (New Haven: Yale University
    Press, 1993): chaps. 2 and 6.

[^51]: "Throughout the world, and certainly in Britain, the emergence of
    the modern welfare and administrative state occurred via a long
    series of piecemeal and unplanned responses to specific problems."
    Gray, *Hayek on Liberty*, 120.

[^52]: Christina Petsoulas, [Hayek's Liberalism and its Origins: His
    Idea of Spontaneous Order and the Scottish
    Enlightenment]{.underline} (London: Routledge, 2001): 13. She goes
    on to quote Hayek's mutually exclusive enumeration of spontaneous
    institutions and designed institutions, which I have quoted above.
    True, Petsoulas also notes (28): "For Hayek, law exists as both a
    'grown' order and a 'made' order, as as [nomos]{.underline} amd
    [thesis]{.underline} respectively."

[^53]: For many examples of "spontaneous orders" see Petsoulas, [Hayek's
    Liberalism and Its Origins]{.underline}, 12-33, passim.

[^54]: Hayek, [Studies in Politics, Philosophy, and
    Economics]{.underline}, 163. He says elsewhere: "though spontaneous
    order and organization will always coexist, it is still not possible
    to mix these two principles of order in any manner we like." [Law,
    Legislation, and Liberty]{.underline} vol. 1, 48.

[^55]: Hayek, [New Studies in Politics, Philosophy, and
    Economics]{.underline}, 74 and 80.
