**John Gray -- and Critical Rationalism**

1.  ***Introduction***

I have known John Gray for many years. I have long been an admirer of
his work, impressed by both the range of his knowledge and the quality
and quantity of his output. I was also struck by the way in which, from
early on, he combined an appreciation of Hayek with a concern about the
way in which Hayek's ideas about the kind of progress one might expect
in market-based societies was in tension with traditionalism. On this
issue, John seemed to me to highlight an issue which was not properly
appreciated by the entire tradition of free-market conservatism.

Over time, John moved from careful, broadly analytical concerns -- as
were found in his early work on Mill and his essay on Popper's
liberalism -- to a concern with the late Twentieth Century revival of
'classical liberalism'. From this, he moved to an interest in various
foundationalist attempts to provide a justification for classical
liberalism and related approaches. This led to a succession of
enthusiasms, followed swiftly by disillusionments. I wrote a long
critical review of these developments in 'Gray's Progress: From
*Liberalisms* to *Enlightenment's Wake'* (Shearmur 2007).

One striking feature of these moves on Gray's part, was that he
typically wrote retrospectively about different views about which he had
previously been enthusiastic. He had acute things to say about them. But
he also tended to write about them as if only a fool or a knave could
have embraced the ideas in question. What was odd about this, is that
they were often views which he had embraced until recently, himself.
This pattern continued -- with his shifting from liberalism, to
Oakeshottian conservatism, to a favouring of Tony Blair's 'New Labour'
and ideas from the New Liberal tradition of T. H. Green and his
successors, and then on to a distinctive form of Green concern.

Gray also shifted from writing largely about political philosophy, to an
engagement also with political journalism. This was often acute. But
there was a tendency to offer unargued ex cathedra judgements about all
kinds of substantive philosophical issues. While his concern with
contemporary events sometimes took a turn towards prognostications of
the future. The intellectual model for this read as if he shifted
between acute situational analysis, to gazing into the crystal balls of
Mystic Meg.

Gray ended up -- if that is the right word to use about someone whose
substantive ideas seem so frequently on the move -- in a form of
pessimistic scepticism. He is critical of all ideas about progress
(while admitting the usefulness of certain technical innovations), and
about humanism (in the sense of views which view humans as being
radically distinct from animals). Even when Gray was a liberal, his
liberalism was combined with a form of pessimism which did not fit well
with the liberal tradition. One might say that it would seem as if, in
the end, it is his pessimism which has won out.

There is much in Gray's work which merits detailed discussion, not least
his changing views about Hayek, which I hope to address on a future
occasion.[^1] My engagement here will fall into two parts.

In the first, I will suggest that what might be called some of his later
political ideas merit elaboration. They are inviting and interesting,
but seem to me to call for greater and more systematic explication and
the facing of some problems. That this is a worthwhile enterprise, I
will argue for further in the final part of my second section.

In the second section, I will address his pessimism. In part this may
simply be a matter of temperament. John is no more likely to be arguable
out of that, than would his soul-mate Eeyore be temptable out of his
dreary paddock.[^2] But I shall address this, by discussing the degree
to which certain of the motifs of John's later work -- his critique of
progress, and his stress on the continuity between humans and animals --
are also to be found in the work of Karl Popper. Popper, it seems to me,
showed how these themes could be explored in interesting ways. But his
work also suggested that they could be combined with optimism,[^3] and a
concern with what might be done to advance our knowledge, and make
piecemeal improvements to our current situation.

A further contribution from Popper, however, could in my view be an
epistemological one. For John, it seems to me, while he has very
reasonably turned his back on foundationalism, seems unclear about what,
then, we might make of our knowledge, and of the role of pluralism
within it. I will conclude by waying a little about what I take Popper
to be offering us here, in the hope that this is something that John
might find attractive.

2.  **Gray's Liberalism**

I have already indicated that it is risky to try to offer an account of
John's political views and to engage with them, just because he is
regularly on the move. In addition, lots of his ideas have been
developed in essays within which many different themes are pursued in
quick succession.

But it seems to me worthwhile to sketch briefly something that has at
least been present in his later work, and to engage with it. For it
seems to me interesting and important in itself, but also to pose some
problems which anyone attracted to it needs to grapple with.

What I have in mind, here, is John's interesting combination of a deep
pluralism of traditions and moralities, minimalist broadly shared ideas
about morality, and a *modus vivendi* conception of liberalism. His
pluralism relates not just to his developments of Berlin's ideas about
values, ways of life and moral traditions, but also to the idea that
there are different forms of capitalism.

I would like to raise two different issues about all this. The first, is
that, on the face of it, a *modus vivendi* conception of liberalism
could do with tentative explication in institutional terms. At one
level, if different ways of life are to co-exist, we could do with the
explication of tentative rules about how they might usefully
inter-relate. It would I think be na√Øve to proceed as if we could lay
down such things in a timeless manner. But at least on the face of it,
pragmatic guidelines for their inter-relationships would be useful, and
the (ongoing) codification of ideas about this, might offer guidance as
to how we might inadvertently avoid damaging our, and others, ways of
doing things.

There are two levels to this. On the one side, if people are living in
different ways, pursuing different role models and cultivating different
virtues, then they are likely to need to find ways of socializing their
members into these distinctive ways of doing things, and may need to
find ways of protecting how they do this from influences from elsewhere.
(It is striking that, in her writings about her intellectual and moral
development, Ayaan Hirsi Ali tells us of how the academic study of
Nineteenth Century English literature featuring chaste romantic love,
had a striking impact on her life in a Somali culture of arranged
marriage.[^4] (Ali \[2006\] 2007; 2015). Further, if there are different
forms of capitalism, there is the question of whether trade takes place
between them. Rules will be needed for this. But if trade is taking
place, there is likely to be impact from this -- and in ways that may be
difficult to anticipate -- from one form of capitalism on another.

There is also the question of whether interaction -- and learning --
takes place. There is a sense in which one might see the 'Utopia'
section of Robert Nozick's *Anarchy, State, and Utopia* (Nozick, 1974)
as having offered a model (which does not depend on his ideas about
rights) for J. S. Mill-style 'experiments in living'. On the face of it,
if one wishes to recognise the legitimacy of pluralism, not only does
one need an institutional framework within which such pluralism can take
place. But one also needs to ask: can we not hope to learn from other
experiments in living, and from what people in other traditions might
make of us? Different traditions may face similar problems. But equally,
they may hit difficulties particular to themselves, which people from
outside may be able to diagnose and make suggestions about. Not only may
dialogue be productive, even when there is no expectation of reaching
consensus. But such exchanges may also stimulate people within different
traditions to engage, within them, in the creative *Invention of
Tradition*.[^5]

Such interaction, learning and innovation, however, may require that
there is a measure of hierarchy involved (lest the taken-for-granted
moral ideas and traditional practises of ordinary members unravel). It
is striking that, in their study of the in many ways successful
activities of the Satmar Hasidism in modern America, innovation from the
leaders of the group plays an important role.[^6]

The second kind of issue relates to what happens at the individual
level. I have already suggested that a tradition may need to find ways
of protecting its members from certain kinds of contacts with other
traditions. At the level of the individual, this would seem to be needed
for socialization into the specifics of a tradition to take place.
While, as I have just suggested, while learning and innovation may be
essential, traditions may only function if this activity is initially
limited to its leading members.[^7]

However, this leads us to a twofold problem. On the one side, there are
issues concerned with the kinds of freedoms and choices that are
available to the individual. My concern, here, is not with issues of
rights of the kind that John I think correctly repudiates. Rather, it
relates to what can be offered to the individual within a particular
tradition, if the tradition is to keep its integrity. On the other side,
the development of the internet, and social media, has led to a kind of
fragmentation of knowledge, and the undermining of the social vehicles
for fallible expert authority which we had in the past.[^8]

The other issue concerns a theme the significance of which I have
already highlighted in Gray's work. It relates to Hayek's arguments
about knowledge and the use of socially scattered tacit knowledge and
information. As far as I know, Gray has not repudiated this,[^9] instead
stressing that there can be different forms of market-based society,
within different traditions.

But to the degree to which this point is right, it would suggest -- to
put things provocatively -- a pluralistic capitalist version of
Fukuyama's thesis might be correct, at least for those who are operating
in competitive, market-based societies. But if this is the case, then we
need, I think, to pay attention to a theme of which John has made much
in his discussion of 'neoliberalism'.[^10] It is that economic activity
within such societies may have the effect of undermining what could be
called the economic basis of traditions and established forms of life.

John, when he was in what one might call his 'New Labour' phase, wrote
as if there could be the adjustment of the economy on the basis of local
understandings of fairness. Such a thing is possible. But how stable are
such local understandings, and how effective can such adjustments be, if
we are in capitalist economies with the features that Hayek has
highlighted? In addition, in his writings on different foundational
approaches to classical liberalism, John exhibited a good knowledge of
the kinds of issues which had been raised by writers in the public
choice tradition about the problems of democracy. One does not have to
be uncritical of such literature to recognise the degree to which it --
and the important literature on the problems of American 'pluralism' --
pose difficult issues concerning what one will actually get as the
product of political interventions into the economy of this kind, made
in the name of 'social justice'.[^11]

In raising these issues, I should stress once again, I am not aiming to
offer a criticism of John's work. Rather, it seems to me that he has
raised interesting ideas, which it would be nice to have explicated in
more detail, and also explored in the light of the kinds of issues that
I have raised here. The idea that such exercises are important, will be
defended in the final section of this paper.

3.  ***Popper, Historicism and Progress***

Popper is well-known for his criticisms of what he referred to as
'historicism'. At one level, this was the idea that there was a
teleology to history, a view which was inherited from Christian ideas,
and which was embraced, in one form or another, by both the political
right and the political left in the inter-war period. Popper had, in his
teens, been an enthusiastic Marxist, working as a volunteer in the
office of the small Austrian Communist Party. But -- in a story which he
told many times -- he was shaken by the way in which a Communist-led
demonstration led to the death of unarmed workers. And this, in turn,
led him to reflect on the substantive ideas which he had uncritically
espoused, and on the claims which were being made about their
epistemological status.

The result was his now well-known critique of teleological ideas about
the course of history. It is also striking, however, that Popper came to
identify, and to criticise, what he called historicist ideas in many
other areas, too. As a young man, he was immersed in musical
developments in Vienna, and worked with some of those associated with
Sch√∂nberg.[^12] While he got to know their music well, he was critical
of them, not least because of their acceptance of Wagnerian ideas about
'the music of the future'. In reaction against this, Popper developed
his knowledge about, and undertook work in the tradition of, Bach.
Popper was also critical of ideas about 'moral futurism'.

Popper was also guarded in what he thought that we might expect of
progress in any form. As Popper wrote (Popper, 1963):

> ...in science, we often learn from our mistakes, and ... we can speak
> clearly and sensibly about making progress there. In most other fields
> of human endeavour there is change, but rarely progress (unless we
> adopt a very narrow view of our possible aims in life); for almost
> every gain is balanced, or more than balanced, by some loss. And in
> most fields we do not even know how to evaluate change.

In addition, there is another important theme to Popper's work: his
anti-utopianism.[^13] As Gerald Gaus argued in *The Tyranny of the
Ideal* (Gaus, 2016), one could take Popper's criticism of Plato's
utopianism as a more general critique of Ideal-based approaches to
politics, including in the work of Rawls. Popper considers it important
to do what we can to alleviate suffering and injustice, he takes this to
be a fallible, continuing activity. And he is also critical of the idea
that we can sensibly assume that we are in possession of an unchanging
ideal, for the sake of which other people and their interests should be
sacrificed.

Popper does, indeed, uphold the ideal of 'Emancipation Through
Knowledge' (Popper 1995; but see also Popper, 1945). However, he does so
in such a way that it does not seem to me open to the kinds of
criticisms that John has advanced.

4.  **Popper, Humans and Animals**

Popper also offers a distinctive view about the relationship between
mankind and animals. At one level, it is striking that he shares John's
concerns about the problematic impact of a growing human population, and
also the view that we should look positively at science and technology
to assist us.

However, he also holds that there are key continuities between us and
other animals; in particular he takes animals to be conscious, and also
to work with hypotheses about the world. For Popper, all knowledge is a
matter of trial and error, and this includes animal knowledge. While, in
his view, both animals and humans have fallible inbuilt expectations
about the world. Popper emphasised this in some of his earliest work on
psychology (see Popper 1963b). While he stresses the continuity of
themes across animals and people from an evolutionary perspective,
notably in his 'The Rationality of Scientific Revolutions' (Popper 1994,
chapter 1). That being said, it is also striking that Popper takes
seriously the issue of human freedom, and the role of behaviour and
consciousness in biology. He does so, however, in a manner which is not
grounded in issues to do with religious faith.[^14]

There are, obviously, on Popper's account, significant differences
between people and animals. But they are a matter of degree. Popper has
stressed the significance, for us, of what he calls 'world 3': the world
of the products of the human mind, and the way in which we have the
potential to grow and develop ourselves in interaction with such
products, and other people. But at the same time, he also emphasised not
just the role of animal consciousness, but also the role of traditions
and extra-somatic products in the life of some animals.

Further, while Popper takes a strongly evolutionary view -- a Darwinian
view -- of ourselves and of our knowledge, he does not see this as being
incompatible with ideas about emergence, or with our aspiring for truth
(rather than just knowledge of a practical character). After all, we
have been able to create music, and works of art and literature, to say
nothing of what we have accomplished in science, mathematics and logic.
All this has been accomplished with cognitive tools which it appears
showed themselves to be effective, and led to our survival, in the
pursuit of practical, survival-related tasks. But this does not suggest
that what we can accomplish is limited by the basis on which these
capacities originated.

What is going on -- in terms of our selves, our knowledge, and the world
-- looks to me a matter for exploration together, and thus for creative
interplay between speculation, criticism and testing. It is this which
leads me to the final section of this piece, in which I describe and
commend to John aspects of Popper's epistemology. I do this in part
because I think that it is important -- but typically not understood in
the way in which I think that it should be. But also because after his
abandonment of foundationalism, John has seemed to me unclear as to what
his own ideas here are, and possibly as a result, to have been unduly
negative in his critical appraisals of the approaches of other people.

5.  **The Epistemology of Critical Rationalism**

What does human knowledge look like from a broadly Popperian
perspective?[^15]

The key starting-point is our offering fallible interpretations of the
world in which we find ourselves. We are biologically predisposed to see
the world in certain ways. But there is no reason why these should be
correct, or why the subjective convictions that we might have about them
are any guide to their correctness.

We may, with the help of other people, be able to discover that
something is wrong with our ideas. They may be open to empirical
testing, and fail in tests. This tells us that something needs to be
modified, but not what. How we proceed is up to us. But if we are
interested in the growth of our knowledge, we will need to endeavour to
produce ideas which explain what, so far, seemed to be correct in our
knowledge, and at the same time, to try to correct the difficulties that
we have found, and which ways that themselves say interesting things and
are testable.[^16]

We may well have ideas about the kinds of views that we should develop
to cope with our problems. These may constitute a research tradition, or
what Popper called a 'metaphysical research programme'. (Metaphysical
because not open to empirical testing.) Such views may themselves be
open to critical appraisal, in terms of their ability to resolve the
problems towards which they are addressed, or others which may arise
with the passing of time. We may also -- as Lakatos stressed -- discuss
the degree to which those working within a research programme have been
able so far to generate useful scientific theories in line with their
programmatic ideas.

All this leaves us with a situation in which there is a pluralism of
competing research traditions or metaphysical research programmes.[^17]
In principle it is open to anyone to appraise how they are doing so far
-- in terms both of how they are faring with regard to theoretical (or
if you like, 'conceptual') problems, and what their track record has
been in terms of the production of successful empirical theories. These
are matters concerning which we might well be able to get agreement
across people attracted to different programmatic views. Clearly, there
is no reason to expect that their reaction to an agreed
problem-situation will be the same. People will take different views
about how attractive the pursuit of different programmes will be. Or
they might wish to argue that aspects of hitherto commonly shared
standards should be revised. But a crucial point about this, would be
that their conviction about such matters would be just that, and what
they would need to do is to aim for arguments for the revision of our
existing standards which would be found inter-subjectively telling.

Much more could obviously be said.[^18] But I will conclude with two
comments.

The first is that while I have illustrated these ideas with an eye to
scientific knowledge, they would seem to me equally applicable to
political and, indeed, religious ideas.

The second, and this is why I am commending it to John, is that it would
suggest that while the kind of critical eye that he has for different
views is very much to be welcomed, openness to criticism -- and thus the
existence of open problems -- is to be expected everywhere. One cannot
expect the discovery of problems to be fatal to an approach. But, at the
same time, the keeping track of what an approach amounts to, of its
strengths and weaknesses, and of how those who favour it have responded,
over time, becomes of paramount importance. Accordingly, we might hope
that John the trenchant critic might be prodded into a transformation
into John the tracker of the performance of views with which he is
critically engaged.

One might add, to this, a further twist. It is certainly the case that,
on the basis of the approach that I have sketched, criticism might
usefully come from anywhere. But it is also important, if we are to have
to make choices with regard to research programmes or, indeed, to policy
measures, to be able to take a comparative perspective. This means that
it is typically useful for someone to give an indication of the
perspective that they take, and of what they understand its current
problematic to be. In John's case this would be particularly welcome,
just in the sense that -- as I indicated at the beginning of this piece
-- John has, over the years, offered a variety of most interesting
reflections on politics and political philosophy. But it is difficult to
judge just where he currently stands, and what he understands its
problematic to be. Also it would be useful to know why he thinks that
the balance of the argument should incline one towards the pursuit of
this, rather than one or other of the approaches which he has favoured
in the past.

**References**

Ali, Ayaan Hirsi, \[2006\] 2007. *Infidel: My Life*. New York: Free
Press.

Ali, Ayaan Hirsi, 2015. *Heretic: Why Islam Needs a Reformation Now*.
New York: Harper.

Coase, Ronald. 1998. *The Firm, The Market and the Law*. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Gaus, Gerald 2016. *The Tyranny of the Ideal*. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Hayek, Friedrich. 1944. *The Road to Serfdom*. London: Routledge.

Hobsbawm Eric and Ranger, Terence (Eds.). 1983. *The Invention of
Tradition*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Nozick, Robert 1974. *Anarchy, State, and Utopia*. New York: Basic
Books.

O'Hear, Anthony. 2025. *Popper, Philosophy and Faith*. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Popper, Karl. 1945. Has History Any Meaning. In *The Open Society and
Its Enemies*. London: Routledge.

Popper, Karl. 1963a. Truth, Rationality, and the Growth of Scientific
Knowledge. In *Conjectures and Refutations*, London: Routledge: 216-17.

Popper, Karl 1963b. Science: Conjectures and Refutations. In
*Conjectures and Refutations*, London: Routledge: 1-32.

Popper, Karl. \[1974\] 1976. *Unended Quest*. London: Fontana.

Popper, Karl. 1994. The Myth of the Framework. In *The Myth of the
Framework*. London: Routledge.

Popper, Karl 1995. Emancipation through Knowledge. In *In Search of a
Better World*. London: Routledge: 137-50.

Popper, Karl and Eccles, Sir John. 1977. *The Self and Its Brain*. New
York: Springer International.

Shearmur, Jeremy. 2000. The Use of Knowledge: A preliminary exploration.
Knowledge, Technology and Policy 13: 30--48.

Shearmur, Jeremy. 2007. Gray's Progress. *Journal of Libertarian
Studies*, 21 (3): 79--114.

Shearmur, Jeremy. 2022. Lessons from Twentieth-Century Political
Philosophy Before Rawls. In G. Delanty, G. and Stephen P. Turner, S. P.
(Eds) *Routledge International Handbook of Contemporary Social and
Political Theory*, second edition. London and New York: Routledge:
141-52.

Shearmur, Jeremy 2025. *M·øëyƒÅn-e HƒÅyek va Popper* \[Between Popper and
Hayek\]. Tehran: ·π¨ar·∏•-no Publications.

Shearmur, Jeremy (under submission). The Social Use of Expert Knowledge.

Stolzenberg Nomi, and Myers, David. 2021. *American Shtetl: The Making
of Kiryas Joel, A Hasidic Village in Upstate New York*. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

[^1]: I am currently revising a volume which brings together some
    historical studies of classical liberal institutions in the
    Twentieth Century. After this, my next engagement will be with
    critics of Hayek, from Foucault, through Plant to Gray.

[^2]: Eeyore is the donkey with a Gray-like temperament, in A. A.
    Milne's Winnie-the-Pooh stories.

[^3]: Popper, indeed, thought that optimism was a moral duty.

[^4]: For what it is worth the books seem to me to be more illuminating
    if taken as studies of a collapsed Somali culture and problems of
    social change, than they are of Islam.

[^5]: See Hobsbawm Eric and Ranger, Terence (Eds.) (1983). While the
    thrust of the book was a debunking of various traditions, one might
    also see it as suggesting how traditions might be invented as
    creative responses to issues that arise in particular forms of life.

[^6]: Nomi M. Stolzenberg Nomi, and Myers, David (2021), refer to
    Hobsbawm and Ranger (1983) on their p. 17. But it is also clear
    that, in what has proved to be a successful arrangement, innovation
    has a top-down character. Lengthy battles have been fought against
    dissident groups, and life for ordinary members is highly
    traditionalistic.

[^7]: This is not to say that others may not, in fact, be able to have
    good ideas. The problem, rather, is that there is a danger of
    fragmentation, and also the introduction of ideas and practises
    which have unintended consequences for the tradition, if its
    organization is too flat.

[^8]: I have discussed this in Shearmur (2025), and in more detail (and
    in English) in Shearmur (under submission).

[^9]: There are, in my view, important qualifications to be made to this
    argument, relating to Ronald Coase's work on the firm (Coase, 1988).
    It is just that if transaction costs limit the degree to which it
    makes sense to organise even market-based commercial activity on the
    basis of market transactions, then Hayek's argument is limited in
    its scope. See also Shearmur (2000).

[^10]: At times he has treated this as an issue about 'Thatcherism' or
    'neoliberal ideology', but he has also, I think more correctly, also
    acknowledged that it is a feature of large, market-based societies
    as such.

[^11]: It is also worth recalling Hayek's discussion in (1944).

[^12]: Popper discusses this, and its inter-relationship with his work
    in other areas, in his (1974 \[1976\]). Brian Boyd, in the biography
    of Popper on which he is currently at work, discusses this in much
    more detail.

[^13]: See, for a fuller discussion, Shearmur (2022).

[^14]: O'Hear (2025), while giving welcome attention to Popper's
    contributions to Popper and Eccles (1977), seems to me in this
    respect to misread him badly.

[^15]: In what I write here, I will draw on the full range of Popper's
    work, but also on aspects of what Lakatos wrote about research
    programmes. However, my emphasis will be Popperian rather than
    Lakatosian.

[^16]: And which -- as both Popper and Lakatos emphasised -- receive
    occasional corroborations of the speculative ideas that they
    advance.

[^17]: These can also, perfectly respectably, include speculative ideas
    of a realist character.

[^18]: I am in the course of writing a paper for a conference in which I
    try to spell out the distinctive character of a critical rationalist
    approach in a much more systematic way.
